Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a complete course for the CCNA, Cisco
Certified Network Associate.
In this video we will look at one of the supplemental
resources I provide for this course, Anki
flashcards.
For most lecture videos of the course I will
provide a deck of flashcards that you can
open in the Anki app.
These flashcards will help you review and
remember important information covered in
each lecture.
Anki is an example of SRS, Spaced Repetition
Software.
It allows you to create flashcards, as well
as import pre-made flashcards such as the
ones I provide.
Anki’s algorithm schedules flashcard reviews
for you each day to help information stay
in your long-term memory.
You don’t have to use the flashcards for
this course, but I highly recommend that you
try them, at least.
So, this is the Anki homepage, apps.ankiweb.net.
If you want to really learn how to use Anki
well you can click on the Docs link up here
to read their documentation.
But I’ll show you the basics in this video
that you need to use my flashcards for this
course.
So, let’s click on Download, and it brings
us down here where we can download Anki.
It’s available for Windows, Mac, Linux,
as well as iPhone and Android.
I use Windows, so I’ve downloaded and installed
the latest version available for Windows.
All versions of Anki except the iPhone version
are free.
The developer uses the sales of the iPhone
app to fund Anki’s development.
At the time I’m making this video the iPhone
version is 25 dollars.
If you are using the Anki flashcards it’s
very convenient to be able to review them
both on your desktop and on the go, so I purchased
the iPhone app myself.
But if you have an iPhone and don’t want
to spend the 25 dollars, there is a web browser
version of Anki available at ankiweb.net.
You can use this web app on an iPhone to review
your Anki flashcards without having to buy
the Anki app.
It’s limited, but good enough for just reviewing
flashcards.
Anyway, download the latest version of Anki
available for your platform and install it
like any other app.
Once you install it and open the app, it will
look like this.
We could spend a lot of time looking at the
various functionalities of Anki, it’s quite
a flexible app.
But for this video let me just walk through
what you need to know to use the flashcards
in this course.
And note that what I’m showing you in this
video is just my recommendation for how to
set up Anki.
There are other ways you can set up your Anki
decks for studying, so feel free to experiment
if you want to.
Anyway, when you first open the app, you will
see this ‘Default’ deck here.
This deck will be here until you create or
import another deck.
So, let’s create a deck by clicking the
Create Deck button down here.
I’ll name it CCNA and click OK.
Notice the CCNA deck has now replaced the
default deck.
We’re going to use this CCNA deck as a ‘parent’
deck, and import the decks for each day of
my CCNA course as sub-decks of this one.
Now, how can you get the flashcards for my
course?
Let’s go to the first video of the course,
Day 1 – Network Devices.
The link to get both the Anki flashcards and
the Packet Tracer lab files is in the top
line of the description of the videos, where
it says ‘Free CCNA flashcards and packet
tracer lab files for the course.
The link is jitl.jp/ccna-files.
If you click on that link, you will be redirected
to this page.
If you want you can just type in this URL
directly, sendfox.com/jeremysitlab.
To receive the files, enter your first name
here, your email address, and then click on
Join.
What should happen after that is you will
get an email to confirm your address, and
after you confirm your email address you will
get the email with the links for the flashcards
and packet tracer labs.
As I’ve written above, if there are any
issues send me an email at info@jeremysitlab.com.
I check my emails at least once a day, so
I’ll get back to you.
But, before sending an email please wait at
least 10 minutes.
I often get emails from people saying they
couldn’t receive the flashcards, and then
a few minutes later they send me another email
saying nevermind, the email came.
So, please wait at least 10 minutes.
And note that, if you don’t want any further
emails from me after receiving the link for
the flashcards and labs, feel free to unsubscribe
from the mailing list.
The files are all in a Google Drive and labeled
by the day of the course: Day 1 flashcards,
Day 1 lab, Day 2 flashcards, Day 2 lab, etc.
All of the files are in this one drive, no
need to sign up multiple times.
And actually you won’t be able to sign up
multiple times if you try.
The email system I use will only send each
email to each address once.
I highly recommend bookmarking this Google
Drive so you can access the files easily.
For this demonstration I’ve download the
flashcards for Day 1 and Day 2, here they
are in the folder.
To import them into Anki you can simply click
on the files.
I’ll import Day 1 by clicking on it, and
click close on this notification.
And then do the same for Day 2.
Now both decks are imported into Anki.
Notice, next to each deck, there is a ‘20’
indicating that there are 20 new flashcards
in these decks to learn today.
Here’s my first recommendation: increase
the maximum number of daily new cards and
reviews.
To do that, click the gear icon for either
of the decks.
Notice that the default settings for new cards
per day is 20, and maximum reviews per day
is 200.
I don’t want Anki limiting my new cards
or reviews, so I’ll just increase these
to 999 and 9999 and click on Save.
Now notice that the Day 1 deck has 22 new
cards and the Day 2 deck has 57, those are
the actual number of cards in each deck: before
the number of new cards Anki would show was
limited by that setting.
Of course, you don’t have to increase the
limits, that’s just what I do.
My next recommendation is to make the flashcard
decks for each day of the course sub-decks
of this CCNA deck we made earlier.
To do that, click on the deck name and drag
and drop it on to the CCNA deck.
I’ll do it for both decks.
Now the CCNA deck has 79 new cards ready for
us to learn, but if I click the plus icon
next to the deck name I can see the individual
sub-decks.
So, this gives more flexibility in learning
and reviewing cards.
If you want to review flashcards from all
days of the course at once, you can click
on the CCNA deck.
But if you just want to review cards from
a particular day of the course, you can click
on that particular deck.
For this demonstration I’ll just show the
Day 1 cards.
To review cards in a deck, click on the deck’s
name.
And then click on Study Now.
So, here’s the first flashcard we are shown.
The ellipses in square brackets is the information
you have to remember.
That’s the format I use for my flashcards.
So, think of the answer, and then to check
if you’re correct click on Show Answer down
here.
Now there are a few options.
If you got the answer wrong, you can click
Again.
And note that it says ‘less than 1 minute’
above.
That means Anki will show you the card again
within 1 minute, so you can try again to get
the right answer.
If you got the right answer but it was hard,
it took some time to remember, you can click
on hard.
In that case it will show the card again within
6 minutes.
‘Good’ is the normal option, it will show
the card again within 10 minutes.
And if the card is easy you can click on that
and it will show the card again in 4 days.
Personally, I recommend using only the Again
and Good buttons.
If you answered correctly, click Good.
If you didn’t, click Again.
Nice and simple.
I’ll click on good, and now that’s our
first card done for now.
Notice above the Show Answer button, the blue
number is now 21, those are the new cards,
and now there is a red 1.
That card has just moved from ‘New’ to
‘Learning’.
In Anki, new cards must be reviewed twice
in the first day.
The first time they will be included in the
blue number, meaning ‘New’.
The second time, they will be included in
the red number, meaning ‘Learning’.
After that, when Anki shows us that card in
the future, it will be in the green category,
meaning ‘Review’.
Let me demonstrate.
I’ll just use the space bar to go through
these new cards.
If you hit space bar the option in blue will
be selected, which is ‘Good’ in this case.
And each time I select ‘Good’ on one of
the new cards it is moved over to the ‘Learning’
category.
After we get back to the first card and hit
Show Answer again, notice that this time if
I select ‘Good’ the interval is increased
to 1 day.
That means tomorrow Anki will show me the
card again.
If I answer correctly again tomorrow, that
interval will increase, maybe to 3 days.
If I answer correctly that time it’ll increase
again, for example maybe to 5 or 6 days after
that.
That’s the power of SRS apps like Anki.
As you correctly answer each flashcard, that
flashcard’s interval increases to help that
information stay in your long term memory.
I’ll just use the space bar again to go
through these cards, and then this deck will
be done for today.
Tomorrow, Anki will show me all of these cards
again, because they all have a review interval
of 1 day currently.
I’ll click on Decks to return to the menu
again.
So, now next to the Day 1 deck there are 0
new cards.
Tomorrow Anki will show me those cards again
for review, they will appear under the ‘Due’
column.
Before wrapping up, let me give a bit of advice.
First is to not add more than one deck at
a time.
For this demonstration I added both Day 1
and Day 2, but I’m only learning the Day
1 cards.
If you add too many new cards each day, the
number of reviews Anki will give you every
day will accumulate and take a lot of time
to review.
And make sure to do the reviews Anki schedules
for you every day, because if you miss a day
or two that will also cause the scheduled
reviews to accumulate and it will be hard
to catch up.
My personal recommendation is to add each
flashcard deck after you have studied that
particular day’s lecture video.
After you’ve studied Day 1, add the Day
1 deck.
After you’ve studied Day 2, add the Day
2 deck, etc.
Then do the scheduled reviews every day by
just clicking on the parent ‘CCNA’ deck,
rather than each individual sub-deck.
But as I said before, these are just my recommendations,
you are free to use Anki as you wish.
In this video I only showed the basics you
need to review my flashcards, but you can
do a lot more in Anki such as creating your
own flashcards.
I recommend spending some time getting familiar
with Anki and its capabilities.
It’s a great study tool, not just for the
CCNA but for anything.
By making and reviewing effective flashcards
you can choose exactly what information you
will remember, rather than leaving it up to
chance what information your brain will remember
and what information it will forget.
Okay, that was a quick introduction to Anki.
You don’t have to use the Anki flashcards
with this course, but I highly recommend that
you try them.
I think you’ll find that they are very helpful
for remembering what you studied.
Anki is quite popular on the Internet these
days, so if you want to learn more about Anki
and how to use it, check out Google, YouTube,
and Anki’s documentation.
That’s all for this video.
Thanks for watching.