Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a complete course for the CCNA, Cisco
Certified Network Associate.
In this video we will look at an essential
part of the course – the labs in Cisco Packet
Tracer.
First of all, what is a lab?
In the world of IT, ‘doing labs’ or ‘labbing’
refers to hands-on practice with the technology
you’re studying.
Since you’re studying for the CCNA, labbing
means practicing configuring Cisco routers
and switches.
There are a few options for CCNA labs.
One is to buy actual physical Cisco hardware,
real Cisco routers and switches.
However, that can be expensive and isn’t
very convenient.
Fortunately Cisco has an amazing tool called
Packet Tracer which lets you set up simulated
networks on your computer.
We will be using Packet Tracer for the labs
in this course.
Packet Tracer is free, quick and easy to set
up, and lets you create simulated network
labs without having to buy any hardware.
The network devices in packet tracer aren’t
real network devices, it’s just software
designed to simulate network devices so you
can practice configuring them.
In this video we won’t actually configure
any routers and switches, since we haven’t
learned any configurations yet in the course.
Instead we’ll just get familiar with the
Packet Tracer user interface and how to build
simple networks.
First of all, how can you download Cisco Packet
Tracer?
You can download it for free from Cisco on
this page.
Note that I have created a simple redirect
link that will take you to this page, it is
jitl.jp/packet-tracer.
Follow that link and it will take you here.
However, first you will probably see this
login page.
You need a Cisco account to download Packet
Tracer.
So, you can log in here.
Or if you don’t have an account yet, click
on Sign Up at the bottom of this page to create
one.
Once you have created an account and logged
in, my link jitl.jp/packet-tracer will allow
you to see this page.
First let me point out that Cisco’s learning
platform Net Academy has a few courses about
how to use Packet Tracer.
If you really want to learn how to master
Packet Tracer itself, you can take these courses
like ‘Getting Started with Cisco Packet
Tracer’, a short 2 hour course.
Or the one below it, ‘Exploring Networking
with Cisco Packet Tracer’.
In my course we won’t look at all of the
different functionalities of Packet Tracer,
just the ones we need to do the labs in my
course.
So, if you’re interested in learning more
about Packet Tracer you can take these free
courses from Cisco.
Anyway, scroll down and this is where you
can download Packet Tracer itself.
It is available for Windows in 64-bit and
32-bit versions, as well as Ubuntu and macOS.
Download the appropriate version for your
computer, and install it like any other program.
For my course, download the latest version,
which is 8.2 at the time I’m making this
video.
If you have an old version, you might not
be able to run some of the labs.
Old versions of Packet Tracer can’t open
lab files made in newer versions of Packet
Tracer.
However, new versions of Packet Tracer can
open lab files made in older versions of Packet
Tracer.
So, if you have the latest version you should
be able to open all of the lab files.
Now, how can you get the lab files I provide
for my course?
It’s the same as the Anki flashcards.
If you got the link for the flashcards, the
lab files are in that same Google Drive so
there’s no need to follow these steps again.
But I’ll demonstrate once more just in case.
Here is the first lesson of the course again.
In the top line of the description there is
this link: Free CCNA flashcards and Packet
Tracer labs for the course.
And the link is jitl.jp/ccna-files.
Click on that link and you will be redirected
here, to sendfox.com/jeremysitlab.
Enter your first name and email here and then
click join, and then you should get the files
in your email.
If there are any issues, for example if you
don’t get the emails for some reason, send
me an email at info@jeremysitlab.com and I’ll
get back to you when I check my emails.
However please wait at least 10 minutes before
you send me an email.
Sometimes it takes a bit of time for the emails
to be sent.
Okay, once you’ve got my lab files, open
the lab file labeled ‘Day 1 Lab’ in Packet
Tracer and let’s get started.
Note that, when you install Packet Tracer
and then open it, you will have to login to
your Cisco account again.
After that, you should see my lab file like
this if you opened Packet Tracer by clicking
on the lab file.
If not, just go to the File menu and click
Open to open my lab file.
In my lab files the lab instructions will
usually be on the left or bottom of the screen,
and then there will be some devices I’ve
already placed in the network.
In this first lab, there is just one router
which I have named ‘The Internet’.
Then, the lab instructions tell us to place
the other devices to make a network.
Note that, throughout the course I expect
that you will be using my pre-made lab files
to do your labs.
You are free to make the labs yourself from
scratch, without downloading my lab files,
but that won’t work for all of my labs.
Some labs in the course require ‘troubleshooting’.
In those labs I purposefully made some configuration
mistakes, so it’s your job to find those
mistakes and fix them.
Okay, before we go through the lab instructions
for this first lab I want to show you the
Packet Tracer preferences menu.
Go to Options in the top menu, and then Preferences.
In this first tab, the Interface tab, you
can select things like whether or not Device
Model labels are shown.
I usually have this off, but if I turn it
on notice that above ‘The Internet’ 2911
appears.
That is the model name of this router, it’s
a Cisco 2911 router, I just named it ‘The
Internet’ to represent the Internet.
I prefer to have device model labels off,
so I’ll remove this.
If you don’t want to show the Device Name,
you could uncheck this here too, but I think
it’s best to leave the names on.
Anyway, feel free to check out some of these
other settings if you want.
I just want to point out one more tab, that
is the Font tab.
Here you can change the font sizes in Packet
Tracer, for example all of the menu font sizes
or the font size in the devices’ command-line
interface.
To make it easier to see in the videos I set
the font sizes fairly large, but feel free
to set whatever size you prefer.
You can also change the font colors.
For example, if you want to feel like you’re
in the Matrix, change the Router IOS Text
to green, and the Router IOS Background to
black.
Then hit apply and exit.
Then click on the Internet router and go to
the CLI tab.
And hey, now you’re officially a hacker.
CLI stands for Command-Line Interface, by
the way.
This is how we are going to be configuring
routers and switches in the course.
Anyway, I’ll exit from here and let’s
actually do this first lab, which involves
re-creating the network displayed at 16:40
of the Day 1 lecture video about network devices.
Here’s that network.
In the middle there is the Internet.
In this lab I’m just using a router to represent
the Internet.
Then there is the New York Branch on the left
with some PCs, a switch, a router, and a firewall.
And in the Tokyo branch there are two servers,
a switch, a firewall, and a router.
Also somewhere over the Internet there is
an attacker.
Okay so let’s re-create that network.
For the routers, the instructions say to use
Cisco 2911 routers, the same kind of router
I used for The Internet.
To place a device in Packet Tracer go to the
bottom left here and click on this icon for
network devices, and then routers.
Then you can see a selection of router models,
let’s select the 2911 and place two of them
in the network.
This is what a Cisco ISR 2911 router looks
like, by the way.
‘ISR’ is a line of Cisco routers, and
2911 is a particular model in that line.
Okay, next let’s go to the switches menu
here and place two 2960 switches in the network.
Here’s a photo of a Cisco Catalyst 2960
switch, by the way.
Catalyst is the name of a line of Cisco switch
models, and 2960 is one model within that
line.
Okay, next we’ll place the two firewalls
by going to the firewall menu and placing
two 5505 firewalls.
Note that, in the network diagram in the Day
1 lecture video, the New York branch firewall
is between the router and the Internet, and
the Tokyo branch firewall is between the router
and the switch.
Depending on the network design, you might
find the firewall placed in either position.
This is a photo of a Cisco ASA 5505 firewall.
ASA is a series of firewalls made by Cisco,
and 5505 is a particular model within the
ASA line.
Okay now let’s place the end devices like
the PCs and servers.
Go to the ‘end devices’ menu, and here
in the end devices tab we can find PCs, servers,
etc.
So, place two PCs in the New York branch,
and two servers in the Tokyo Branch.
Then, to represent the attacker in the diagram
place a laptop.
Okay, now all of the devices are placed.
This isn’t in the lab instructions, but
let’s rename them to match the diagram in
the lecture video.
To rename a device, just click on the device
name.
PC1 already has the correct name, so I’ll
start on PC2...then SW1...then R1...then FW1...then
R2...then FW2...then SW2...then SRV1...then
SRV2...and finally the attacker.
Okay, now we’ve placed and named all of
the devices.
To connect devices in packet tracer, click
on this lightning bolt icon here.
Now, in the next video of the course we will
study different types of cables used to connect
devices together in a network.
So, for this video we will just let packet
tracer pick the cables for us, by clicking
this lightning bolt which says ‘automatically
choose connection type’.
So, I’ll click on that, click on PC1, and
then click on SW1.
And now they are connected.
Then I’ll do the same to connect PC2 to
SW1.
Now, here’s a trick to speed things up.
Hold down the control key on your keyboard
and click on the lightning bolt.
Then I’ll connect SW1 to R1.
But notice after connecting them, I don’t
have to click the lightning bolt again, it
is still selected because I held down control
while clicking it.
So, I’ll connect R1 to FW1, FW1 to the Internet,
The Internet to R2, R2 to FW2, FW2 to SW2,
SW2 to SRV1, SW2 to SRV2, and finally the
attacker to the Internet.
Now they’re all connected so I’ll click
cancel here, since I don’t need to do any
more connections.
Okay, we’re done with the lab instructions.
We have successfully recreated the network
diagram as shown in the lecture videos.
Most days of the course will include a packet
tracer lab so you can practice configuring
Cisco routers and switches.
Ideally, you should try to complete the lab
on your own in packet tracer after watching
the lecture video.
Then you can check my lab video after to confirm
your solutions.
However, if you’re having trouble doing
the practice labs on your own, feel free to
watch each lab video before actually trying
the lab in packet tracer.
That’s not a problem.
The important thing is that you get hands-on
practice with Cisco routers and switches to
deepen your understanding of the concepts
we cover in the course, and also to prepare
for the exam.
Okay, that’s all for this video.
I hope it was helpful, thanks for watching.