Welcome to my complete CCNA, Cisco Certified
Network Associate course.
This is Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This course aims to be a complete course for
the CCNA, including everything you need to
pass the exam, all 100% free.
Stay tuned till the end of the video for the
quiz to test your knowledge of the material
in this video.
Also, remember to download and use the Anki
flashcards with the link in the description.
Let’s get started.
This second lesson is about interfaces and
cables.
In the last video we talked about some different
kinds of devices you will find in networks.
This lesson will focus on how we connect them,
specifically how we connect them with cables.
Wireless connections are also a topic we’ll
cover, but that’s for later in the course.
Take a look at this photo.
This is the front of a switch.
Notice the 24 interfaces, also known as ports.
Remember, as we learned in the last lecture,
one characteristic of switches is that they
tend to have lots of interfaces to connect
end hosts like PCs and servers to.
Now let’s look at that those words above
the interfaces.
I’ll zoom in.
10/100/100Base-T ports (1 – 24) – Ports
are Auto-MDIX.
Unless you’ve already studied this stuff,
you probably have no idea what that means.
Don’t worry, by the end of this video you’ll
understand all of this and more.
Now let’s focus on the interfaces themselves.
I’ll zoom in again.
Do you recognize this shape?
If your computer is connected to a wired network,
it’s surely using a port like this to connect
to the network.
These are called RJ-45 ports.
RJ stands for Registered Jack, by the way.
Let’s look at the RJ-45 connector at the
end of a cable, I’m sure you’ve seen one
before.
These are all cables with RJ-45 connectors.
As you can see there are some variations in
design and color, but all of these connectors
would fit into the ports we saw in the previous
slide.
The RJ-45 connector is used on the end of
a copper Ethernet cable.
There are Ethernet cables which do not use
copper wiring as well, but we’ll get to
that later.
First of all though, what is Ethernet?
Ethernet is a collection of network protocols and standards,
rather than just a single protocol.
So really Ethernet isn’t one single thing,
making it difficult to define exactly what
it is.
For the purpose of this lesson, we will focus
on types of cabling as defined by Ethernet
standards.
As said above there are many standards included
in Ethernet, but the focus of this lesson
is interfaces and cables, so that’s what
we’ll focus on.
However, we will learn other aspects of Ethernet
in future lessons.
Now, before we learn about Ethernet cable
standards, I want to give a brief explanation
of why we need network protocols and standards.
If two people are talking to each other, and
one only speaks English, and the other only
speaks Japanese, there’s not going to be
a much, or any, communication between them.
What they need is some agreed upon system
of communicating, like a common language between
them.
Network protocols serve that purpose for network
devices.
That’s why standards like Ethernet exist.
Since we’re talking about interfaces and
cables in this video, here’s a more relevant
example.
If you’re trying to connect to, for example,
a network switch, but the maker of the cable
and the maker of the switch haven’t agreed
upon the size and shape of the connector and
port, you won’t be able to connect them.
That’s why there are industry standards
that all vendors follow, both in terms of
physical standards like connectors and cables
like these, as well as logical standards,
like IP, the internet protocol.
Now, connections between devices in a network
operate at a set speed.
These speeds are measured in bits per second.
What is a bit?
Well it’s a value represented by either
a 0 or a 1.
This binary code is how computers work.
YouTube, this video, your operating system,
all of it just a series of 0s and 1s which
your computer interprets.
When communicating across a copper network
cable, a variation in the electrical signal
is interpreted by the receiving device as
a 0 or a 1.
So, that’s a bit, what’s a byte?
Here we have a series of 8 bits.
8 bits is equal to 1 byte.
Now, speed is measured in bits per second.
Imagine a byte, 8 bits, of data being sent along a
wire.
It reaches the neighboring device one bit
at a time like this.
It doesn’t operate one byte at a time like
this.
So, remember, speed is measured in bits per
second, for example kilobits per second, megabits
per second, gigabits per second, and not bytes
per second.
Data on a hard drive for example is measured
in bytes, however, so remember a Gigabyte
is actually 8 times larger than a gigabit.
So let’s review some of these measurements.
1 kilobit is equal to 1,000 bits.
Add three zeroes to that
And you get 1 megabit, which is 1 million
bits.
Add another three zeroes,
And you get one gigabit, or 1 billion bits.
Add another three zeroes to that
and you get one terabit, 1 trillion bits.
You’re not going to see larger units than
this when it comes to network speed, and really
you’re not going to see terabits either.
Speeds are always increasing, however, so
terabits-per-second speeds may be commonplace
soon enough!
Now, there are further units, here’s a snapshot
from wikipedia.
Beyond terabits there are petabits, exabits,
zettabits, yottabits, and more.
Don’t worry about memorizing all of these
though, you’re not going to see network
speeds like these anytime soon!
Okay, finally lets talk about some Ethernet
standards.
These are all defined in the IEEE 802.3 standard.
The IEEE is the institute of electrical and
electronics engineers.
You’ll notice all of these Ethernet standards
begin with IEEE 802.3.
Let’s take a look.
So, here’s a table of some IEEE standards
for copper Ethernet cables.
We’ll also take a look at fiber optic cables
later in this lesson, but I decided to split
them up.
We have one for each of the common network
cable speeds, 10 megabits per second, 100
megabits per second, 1 gigabit per second,
and 10 gigabits per second.
The next column lists the common names.
These are the names we usually use when talking
about different networks interfaces, cables,
and their speeds, for example in a work environment.
The next column lists the official IEEE standard
in which they are defined.
You would probably never use these names when
talking with other network engineers about
a cable, but you should be familiar with them.
This next column lists informal standard names
given to each standard.
10 base-T, 100base-T, 1000base-T, and 10gbase-t.
The numbers obviously refer to their speeds.
How about base and T?
Well, base refers to baseband signalling.
That’s totally out of the scope of the CCNA,
but just so you know the meaning.
T refers to twisted pair cabling, and we’ll
talk about that very soon!.
Finally, the maximum cable length.
Notice that all of them are 100 meters, that’s
the maximum length for twisted pair cables
as defined in Ethernet, for performance and
technical reasons.
So, that’s a lot of information, but I recommend
you memorize these standards.
It may seem difficult, but with the flashcards
in the description, it’s actually quite
easy!
So, don’t forget to download and use the
flashcards in the description, and also make
your own if you want.
Okay, now let’s continue and look in more
detail at the physical cables themselves.
The copper cables used in Ethernet standards
are UTP cables.
UTP stands for Unshielded Twisted Pair.
Unshielded means that the wires have no metallic
shield, which can make them vulnerable to
eletrical interference.
The Twisted pair part is easy to understand
from this photo, as you can see there are
four pairs of cables twisted together.
The twist actually helps protect against eletromagnetic
interference, or EMI.
So, there are four pairs of wires twisted
together, that makes eight wires in total.
Let’s take a look at one of those RJ-45
connectors we saw earlier
If you count the number of pins here, you’ll
find that there are 8 pins, perfect for the
number of wires we saw in the last photo.
However, not all of the Ethernet standards
we saw before actually use all 8 wires.
10BASE-T and 100BASE-T, also known as Ethernet
and Fast-Ethernet cables, use 2 pairs, or
4 wires.
1000BASE-T and 10GBASE-T, however, use all
4 fours, or 8 wires.
Let’s focus on the first two for now, 10BASE-T
and 100BASE-T.
So, let’s say we’re connecting a PC to
a switch with a FastEthernet connection.
These numbers represent the pins on the RJ-45
on the PCs network interface card and the
switch’s interface.
There are 8, but we will only use 4, or 2
pairs, since this is a fastethernet, or 100base-t,
connection.
The first pair is at pin positions 1 and 2,
and will connect to pins at positions 1 and
2 on the switch’s network interface.
Although in this diagram the wires look straight,
remember that in a UTP cable the pairs are
twisted together, so in a real cable these
two wires would actually be twisted together
like in the photo we saw.
The PC will use pins 1 and 2 to transmit data
to the switch,
which we can write as Tx.
Because the PC is transmitting data on pins
1 and 2, the switch cannot transmit on those
pins, it has to receive data
which we can write as Rx, on pins 1 and 2.
There’s an important point to remember here.
The network interface card on a PC or server
transmits data on pins 1 and 2, and the interfaces
on a switch receive data on pins 1 and 2.
Now, the next pair that is used in a 10BASE-T
or 100-BASE-T cable is not 3 and 4.
It’s 3 and 6.
And, of course, the function of each pin is
opposite of the pair on pins 1 and 2.
On the switch,
Pins 3 and 6 are used to transmit Data, and
on the PC
Pins 3 and 6 and used to receive data.
This allows what’s called Full-Duplex transmission.
Full-Duplex transmission means that both devices
and send data at the same time, and no problems
like collisions will occur because they use
separate wires to transmit and receive data.
Just like that, both devices send data at
the same time and there are no problems.
Let’s change the device on the left from
a PC to a router.
Just as a PC usually connects to a switch,
a switch usually connects to a router.
Once again, it’s a fastethernet, or 100BASE-T
connection, so two pairs are used, 1 and 2, and
3 and 6.
Now, which pairs on which side are used to
transmit, and which are used to receive?
Well, we know how a switch functions from
the last slide.
Pins 1 and 2 receive data,
and pins 3 and 6 transmit data.
How about a router?
Well, the network interfaces on a router transmit
and receive data on the same pairs that a
PC’s network interface card does.
A router transmits data on pins 1 and 2
And receives data on Pins 3 and 6.
Again, Ethernet uses full-duplex transmission
So the two devices can send data at the same
time with no issues.
So remember this, Routers transmit data on
pins 1 and 2, and receive data on pins 3 and
6.
This is the same as a PC.
Once again, switches are the opposite, they
receive data on pins 1 and 2 and transmit
data on pins 3 and 6.
When connecting a PC to a switch, or a Router
to a switch, this works fine.
Because they transmit and receive on opposite
pin pairs, a regular cable like this works
well.
This kind of cable, by the way, is called
a straight-through cable.
Remember, a copper Ethernet cable has two
RJ-45 connectors, one on each end.
This kind of a cable is called a ‘straight
through’ cable because pin 1 on one end
connects straight through to pin 1 on the other end.
Pin 2 connects to Pin 2, Pin 3 connects to
Pin 3, etc.
Now, in networks we don’t always connect
PC to switch, switch to router.
What if we want to connect a router to another
router?
Or maybe a switch to another switch?
Or maybe connect two PCs together?
Now I’ve replaced the switch on the right
with another router.
What will happen if the router on the left
sends data to the router on the right?
Well, it’s simply not going to work.
The right router isn’t prepared to receive
data on pins 1 and 2 of its interface,
so communication between the two routers just
doesn’t happen.
So, how can we successfully connect two routers
together?
Or perhaps two switches, or two PCs.
The same thing applies to connecting a PC
directly to a router, also, because they both
transmit data on pins 1 and 2, and receive
data on pins 3 and 6.
Let’s take a look.
I’ve replaced the two routers with two switches,
just to demonstrate that the same thing applies.
If the switch on the left tries to transmit
some data to the switch on the right it doesn’t
work.
The answer to this problem is a different
type of cable.
A straight-through cable connects pin 1 to
pin 1, pin 2 to pin 2, pin 3, to pin 3, etc.
But there’s another type of cable, called
a crossover cable.
In a crossover cable, a pin on one end of
the cable doesn’t connect straight to the
same pin on the other end.
Essentially, the pairs are reversed on each
end.
So, pin 1 on one side connects to
Pin 3 on the other side.
And pin 2 on one side connects to
Pin 6 on the other side.
As you can see, the two pairs, 1 and 2, and
3 and 6, are reversed.
Then, pair 3 on the left side will connect
to Pin 1 on the right side.
And pin 6 on the left side will connect to
pin 2 on the right side.
The wires are ‘crossed over’ each other,
hence the name ‘crossover cable’.
The transmit pins on one side are connected
to the receive pins on the other side, so
now the two devices can send data to each
other with no problems.
Here’s another example.
Again, the network interface card on a PC
and the network interfaces on a router both
transmit data on pins 1 and 2 and receive
data on pins 3 and 6, however if you connect
them together with a crossover cable, they
will be able to exchange data with no issues.
Here’s a chart reviewing different device
types and the pins they use to transmit and
receive data
Routers transmit data on Pins 1 and 2, and
receive data on pins 3 and 6.
Firewalls are the same as routers, they transmit
data on Pins 1 and 2 and receive data on pins
3 and 6.
PCs also transmit data on Pins 1 and 2, and
receive data on pins 3 and 6.
Switches are the only different one of the
group.
Switches transmit data on pins 3 and 6, and
receive data on pins 1 and 2.
Try to remember these.
The flashcards included in the description
will help with this, so I recommend that you
use them!
While all of that is important information
to know, and can cause issues in networks
even in the modern day, the truth is that
most modern networking devices have evolved
beyond having to worry about straight-through
or crossover cables.
That’s because newer networking devices
include a feature called Auto MDI-X.
Previously, if two switches were connected
with a straight-through cable like this, they
would be unable to communicate.
However, Auto MDI-X allows devices to automatically
detect which pins their neighbor is transmitting
data on, and then adjust which pins they use
to transmit and receive data.
They can then exchange data normally.
So, unless you’re working with network equipment
that is quite old, you don’t really have
to worry about straight-through and crossover
cables.
But this is good information to be aware of,
and it’s also good to learn about the concept
of auto MDI-X, both for the exam and for real world
networking.
So, we’ve talked a lot about 10BASE-T and
100BASE-T, but what about the higher speed
copper ethernet cables?
Remember, I said before that for gigabit ethernet
and 10 gigabit ethernet, all 8 wires are used.
The last two pairs are 4 and 5, and 7 and
8.
Again, there will be flashcards to help you
remember these details.
It may seem like a lot to memorize, but if
you use the flashcards properly its amazing
how easy it is to remember all of these things.
Now, here’s another big difference between
1000baseT and 10GBASE-T, and 10base-t and
100-base-t.
In addition to using all four pairs of wires,
in 1000base-T and 10Gbase-T, each pair is
bidirectional, meaning each pair isn’t dedicated
specifically to transmitting data or receiving
data.
This is part of the reason that they can operate
at much faster speeds.
Okay, we’ve covered a lot about connections
using copper UTP cables.
But there is a newer technology that is superior
in many ways.
For example, copper UTP wiring can be used
for up to 100 meters.
that’s usually plenty within a LAN, but
how about for larger networks?
Look at this Cisco switch here.
Here it has 24 ports for RJ45 connectors.
These are the ports you would connect a copper
UTP cable to.
But what about these four interfaces?
Take a look at this Cisco router also.
It only has four RJ45 ports.
The rest of them look like those other four
ports on the switch.
In these interface you insert one of these
It’s called an SFP transceiver.
SFP means small form-factor pluggable.
So you insert one of these into the device,
but still things aren’t complete.
What kind of cable connects to one of these?
You connect one of these cables.
This is a fiber optic cable.
Rather than an electrical signal over copper
wiring, these cables send light over glass
fibers.
Notice that there are two connectors on each
end.
That’s because you need one connector to
transmit data, and one to receive data, on
each end.
The copper UTP cables used separate wire pairs
within the cable to transmit and receive data.
The fiber-optic cables instead use separate
cables to transmit and receive, like this.
Of course, ‘transmit’ on the left connects
to ‘receive’ on the right, and ‘transmit’
on the right connects to ‘receive’ on
the left.
Now let’s examine the structure of the cable
itself.
There are four numbered parts in this diagram,
from the center to the outer layer.
Number 1 is the fiberglass core itself.
Light is transmitted down this core to transmit
data from one device to another.
Number 2 is cladding that reflects light,
Number 3 is a protective buffer, which protects
the fiberglass from breaking
and number 4 is the outer jacket of the cable.
Now there are a couple main types of fiber-optic
cables.
single-mode fiber, and
multimode fiber.
Let’s check out their characteristics and
differences.
These are two examples of multimode fiber
cables.
The center represents the fiberglass core,
and the blue represents the reflective cladding
that reflects light down the cable.
In multimode fiber cable, the core, the actual
glass fiber, is wider than single mode fiber.
This wider core allows multiple angles, known
as modes, of lightwaves to enter the fiber
glass core, as you can see in these two diagrams.
Notice the red and black lines representing
light waves travelling down the fiberglass
core, reflecting off the cladding at different
angles.
Multimode fiber allows longer cables than
UTP, which are limited to 100 meters, but
still shorter than single-mode fiber, which
we will look at next.
Multimode fiber cables are cheaper than single-mode
fiber, and this is because they use cheaper
transmitters, which are often LED-based.
This is an example of a single-mode fiber
cable.
Again, the center represents the fiberglass
core, and the blue represents the reflective
cadding.
The core diameter of a single-mode fiber cable
is narrower than a multimode fiber, meaning
the glass fiber is thinner.
You can notice this in the diagram here, compared
to the multimode fiber diagrams.
Light enters at a single angle, known as a
mode, from a laser-based transmitter.
Notice in the diagram that the light wave
travels straight down the core of the cable.
Single-mode fiber allows longer cable lengths
than both UTP and multimode fiber cables.
And single-mode fiber cables are more expensive
than multimode fiber cables due to the more
expensive laser-based transmitters used.
Okay, now let’s look at some standards for
fiber-optic cables like we did with UTP cables.
Here’s another chart like the one we looked
at for copper UTP cable standards, this time
for fiber-optic cables.
First up is a standard for 1 gigabit ethernet
over fiber, known as 1000BASE-LX.
It is defined in the IEEE 802.3zed, or zee,
standard.
This standard can be used over single-mode
or multimode fiber cables, and you can see
the difference in the maximum cable lengths,
550 meters for multimode fiber, and 5 kilometers,
or 5000 meters, for single mode fiber.
Next up is 10GBASE-SR, defined in the 802.3ae
standard, which operates at 10 gigabits per
second.
It uses multimode fiber and can support cable
lengths up to 400 meters.
Next is 10GBASE-LR, also defined in the 802.3ae
standard, again operating at 10 gigabits per
second.
10GBASE-LR, however, uses single-mode fiber,
and cables lengths can be up to 10 kilometers.
Finally 10GBASE-ER, also part of the 802.3ae
standard, and operating at 10 gigabits per
second.
It supports cable lengths even longer than
10GBASE-LR, with distances up to 30 kilometers
possible over a standard connection.
This is just a sample of fiber-optic standards,
there are plenty more.
I will include flashcards to help you remember
these standards, but to be honest I doubt
you’ll be asked questions about specific details about the
standards on the exam, but I don’t know
for sure.
However, with the flashcards it’s quite
easy to remember little facts like these,
so I recommend not deleting those flashcards,
but that’s your choice of course.
Finally, let’s review by comparing UTP cabling
and Fiber-optic cabling, starting with UTP.
Copper UTP cables are cheaper than fiber-optic
cables.
Maximum cables distances for UTP cables are
shorter, about 100 meters maximum.
UTP cables can be vulnerable to electromagnetic
interface, or EMI, although the twist in the
cable pairs helps to protect against this.
The RJ45 ports to which UTP cables connect
are cheaper than the SFPs used for Fiber-optic
connections
Also, UTP cables emit, or leak, a faint signal
outside of the cable, which could possibly
be detected and used to copy data, posing
a possible security risk.
Now let’s look at fiber-optic cables.
Fiber-optic cables are more expensive than
UTP cables
They support longer distances than UTP cables.
Their SFP ports are more expensive than RJ45
ports, and single-mode fiber ports are more
expensive than multimode.
They do not emit any signal outisde of the
cable, so there is no security risk there.
Okay, so we covered a lot of information,
but I want to remind you of the supplementary
materials for the video that will help you
remember what you learned.
Like in the last video, there will be an end-of-video
quiz starting from the next slide.
Also, I have made a deck of flashcards to help you
review the information covered in this video,
check the link in the description to download
them.
And there will also be a practice lab using
Packet Tracer, which will be released as a
separate video.
Okay, let’s get started with the quiz.
Quiz question 1.
You connect two old routers together with
a UTP cable, however data is not successfully
sent and received between them.
What could be the problem?
A, they are connected with a straight-through
cable.
B, they are connected with a crossover cable.
or C, they are operating in auto MDI-x mode.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is A, they are connected with a
straight-through cable.
let’s check each of the possible answers.
A crossover cable is not the issue.
In fact, a crossover cable would likely fix the issue.
Because both routers transmit data on pins
1 and 2, a crossover cable is necessary to
properly connect the transmit pins on one
side to the receive pins
(3 and 6) on the other side.
Modern devices with Auto MDI-X enabled don’t
have this issue, but it is possible that the
old routers do not have Auto MDI-X.
So, b, they are connected with a crossover
cable, is incorrect.
Auto MDI-X allows devices to detect which
pins and wires their neighbors are using to
transmit and receive data, and adjust their
own operations to match.
Actually, Auto MDI-X would likely fix this
issue, but since the routers are old they
might not have the Auto MDI-X function.
So, c, They are operating in Auto MDI-X mode,
is incorrect.
On old devices without Auto MDI-X, a straight-through
cable cannot be used to connect devices of
the same type.
A crossover cable is necessary.
So a, they are connected with a straight-through
cable, is the best answer.    Quiz question 2.
Your company wants to connect switches in
two separate buildings that are about 150
meters apart.
They want to keep costs down, if possible.
What kind of cable should they use?
A, UTP.
B, Single-mode fiber, or C, multimode fiber.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, multimode fiber.
Let’s check.
Although UTP would keep the costs down, it
does not support distances over 100 meters.
So A, UTP, is incorrect.
Although single-mode fiber supports distances
much longer than 150 meters, it is more expensive
than multimode fiber.
So b, single-mode fiber, is not the best answer.
Multimode fiber supports distances over 150
meters and is less expensive than single-mode
fiber.
So C, multimode fiber, is the best answer.
Let’s go on to question 3.
Your company wants to connect two offices
that are about 3 kilometers apart.
They want to keep costs down if possible.
Which kind of cable should they use?
A, UTP, B, single-mode fiber, or C, multimode
fiber.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is b, single-mode fiber.
Let’s check the answers.
Although UTP keeps costs down, it does not
support distances of 3 kilometers.
So A, UTP, is incorrect.
Although multimode fiber is cheaper than single-mode
fiber, it also does not support distances of 3
kilometers.
So c, multimode fiber, is incorrect.
Many single-mode fiber standards support cable
lengths much longer than 3 kilometers.
Although single-mode fiber is more expensive
than the other options, it is necessary in
this case.
So B, multi-mode fiber, is the best answer.
A switch has the following indication over
its network interfaces: What would happen
if you connect it to an identical switch with
a straight-through cable?
A, they would operate normally.
B, they would operate at a reduced speed.
or C, they would be unable to communicate.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is a, they would operate normally.
Let’s check.
They would not operate at a reduced speed.
The ports are Auto MDI-X enabled.
However, even if they didn’t have Auto MDI-X,
they wouldn’t operate at a reduced speed.
They simply wouldn’t operate.
So b, they would operate at a reduced speed,
is incorrect.
Because the ports are Auto MDI-X enabled,
they would be able to communicate, even though
they are connected with a straight-through
cable.
So c, they would be unable to communicate,
is incorrect.
Because the ports are Auto MDI-X enabled,
they would operate normally, regardless of
whether they are connected with a straight-through
or a crossover cable.
So a, they would operate normally, is the
correct answer.
Let’s go to the final quiz question for
this video.
Your company needs to connect many end hosts
to a switch which is in a wiring cabinet on
the same office floor as the hosts.
What kind of cable should they use? a, UTP.
b, single-mode fiber, or C, multimode fiber.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is a, UTP.
Let’s check the answers.
Most hosts do not have the capability to connect
to a switch via fiber cabling, and most switches
do not have enough SFP interfaces to support
many hosts.
So b, single-mode fiber, and c, multimode
fiber, are inorrect.
UTP cables are the standard for wired connections
to switches.
Switches typically have many RJ45 ports for
end hosts to connect to, and end hosts will
have an RJ45 port on their network interface
card to connect a UTP cable to.
So a, UTP, is the correct answer.
Thank you for watching.
That's all for this video.
If you want to show your support, please subscribe
to the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA.
I accept donations via cryptocurrency or Patreon
via the links in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
Click the link in the description to check
out Brave, a fast and sleek browser that pays
you to surf the Internet.
That's all for now.