Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA
200-301.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Let’s get started.
In this lab you will use what you learned
in Day 2’s lecture video to connect these
network devices together.
You can select various types of connections
from the bottom left here.
We’ll be using copper straight-through,
copper cross-over, and fiber connections.
Note that packet tracer doesn’t differentiate
between single-mode and multimode fiber, but
try to think about which type would be appropriate
when you use a fiber connection.
So, I’ll start here in the bottom left.
First, the connection between SW3 and PC1.
For the purpose of this lab, we’re assuming
that Auto MDI-X is disabled or not supported
on the devices, so we have to think about
whether to use a straight-through or cross-over
copper cable.
PCs transmit data on pins 1 and 2, and receive
data on pins 3 and 6.
Switches are the opposite, they transmit data
on pins 3 and 6 and receive data on pins 1
and 2.
So, we can use a straight-through cable to
connect all of these PCs, as well as SRV1,
to the switches.
Select straight-through cable here, and connect
the PCs to their appropriate switch.
PC1 to SW3..connect the fastethernet0 interface
on the PC, which is the PC’s network interface
card, to any of the fastethernet interfaces
on the switch.
Next is PC2 to SW4...PC3 to SW7...and SRV1 to SW8.
Now we’ve got a bunch of switches to connect
together.
Devices of the same type require crossover
cables, or else the transmit pins will be
connected to the transmit pins, and the receive
pins will be connected to the receive pins,
which will not allow data to be sent successfully between the devices.
So, let’s connect these switches, SW3 to
SW1...SW1 to SW2...SW4 to SW2...SW7 to SW5...
SW5 to SW6...and last SW8 to SW6.
Next let’s connect these switches to the
routers.
Routers are like PCs, they transmit on pins
1 and 2 and receive on pins 3 and 6.
So let’s connect them to the switches with
straight-through cables.
SW1 to R2...SW2 to R2...SW5 to R4...and SW6 to
R4.
Now it’s time to connect the routers.
Since they are the same device type, we need
to use crossover cables if we use copper cabling.
Take care to look at the distances here.
Since R1 and R2 are just 50 meters apart,
we can use copper cabling, which permits distances
up to 100 meters.
So I’ll connect R2 to R1 with a crossover
cable.  R1 and R3 are 3 kilometers apart,
so clearly we will have to use a fiber-optic
connection here.
Although packet tracer doesnt differentiate
between single-mode and multimode, which is
appropriate here?
Well, mutli mode fiber allows distances up
to 550 meters, which is more than UTP, but
not enough for this connection.
Single-mode allows much longer distances,
30 kilometers, 40 kilometers, even more, so
in this case we would use single-mode fiber.
Let’s connect them, note that this symbol
here is used for fiber optic connections in
packet tracer, notice the two spaces, for
both the transmit and receive cables.
Finally, R3 and R4 are separated by 250 meters.
That’s too long for a UTP cable, but also
not so long that we need single-mode fiber.
A multimode fiber cable would be sufficient.
Let’s connect them together...Okay, the
devices are now all connected.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
That's all for this video.
If you want to show your support, please subscribe
to the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA.
I accept donations via cryptocurrency or Patreon
via the links in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
Click the link in the description to check
out Brave, a fast and sleek browser that pays
you to surf the Internet.