Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA
200-301.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Let’s get started.
In this lab we will examine some network traffic
using packet tracer’s ‘simulation mode’
feature.
But first, let’s take a look at the network
diagram.
There are two routers, R1 and R2, two switches,
SW1 and SW2, and one server and one pc.
The G0/0, G0/1, G0/2 and F0/1 labels indicate
the network interfaces used to connect the
devices.
G means gigabit ethernet, so these interfaces
operate at a speed of one gigabit per second.
You migth also see it written as Gi, or Gig,
but I usually just use G. F means fastethernet,
so these interfaces operate at 100 megabits
per second.
You might also see it written as Fa, instead
of just F. Now these two series of numbers
here, 192.168.1.0/24, and 10.0.0.0/24, are
the network addresses.
Routers are used to connect different networks.
There are two networks displayed here in this
diagram, the one on the left here includes
SRV1, PC1, SW1, SW2, and R1’s G0/0 interface.
They are all in a single network, or subnet,
a term you will learn about soon.
So, that’s the 192.168.1.0/24 network, and
the .100 for SRV1 means that its IP address
is 192.168.1.100, and the .1 by R1 means that
its address is 192.168.1.1.
Wait for the lesson about IP addresses coming
up soon for more information on this topic.
The other network is 10.0.0.0/24, consisting
of R1’s G0/1 interface, and R2’s G0/0
interface.
Notice the .1 and .2, so R1 is 10.0.0.1 and
R2 is 10.0.0.2.
Hopefully that helps you understand a little
bit about how to read a network diagram.
Don’t worry if you have no idea how IP addresses
work, or what that /24 next to the network
addresses means, that will all be explained
in a video coming soon.
So let’s get started on today’s main topic.
I’m going to use packet tracer’s simulation
mode, which you can activate here, in the
bottom right.
Now, I can click through here, and you can
see various network traffic being sent around.
Let’s take a look at some.
At Device SW2 means that SW2 is the one sending
out the data.
It says type, STP.
STP is the spanning-tree protocol, a layer
2 protocol you’ll learn a lot about in this
course.  Let's click on it, and
notice here the 7 layers of the OSI model,
and STP has information in the bottom two
layers.
Let’s look at the Layer 2 header.
Notice it says Layer 2: IEEE 802.3 header.
You might remember that IEEE 802.3 is the
standard number for Ethernet, so this is an
Ethernet Layer 2 header.
Let’s look at some of the information here.
Down here it shows some information about
the process, and notice here at number
2: the device encapsulates the PDU into an
Ethernet frame.
There’s the encapsulation process I talked
about in the lecture video.
Let’s take a look at the Layer 1 info.
Notice that the information is the two interfaces
that it sends the frame out of.
Information like the physical ports, or interfaces,
on a device are Layer 1 information, because
it is the physical layer.
Now let’s look at another bit of network
traffic, this time AT device R1, and the type
is OSPF.
OSPF is a layer 3 protocol, it’s used to
discover the best paths to different networks.
You’ll learn a lot about it, too, in this
course.
STP only had Layer 2 and Layer 1 information,
but OSPF has Layer 3, Layer 2, and Layer 1
information.
Notice in the Layer 3 header, source IP address,
and destination IP address.
Remember, IP addresses are Layer 3 information.
Next, to look at some traffic that includes
information all the way up to Layer 7, I will
go on PC1.
Pc1 is using a protocol called DHCP to automatically
receive an IP address.
To generate some DHCP traffic, and DHCP is
a layer 7 protocol, I’ll get PC1 to release
its current IP address, and then renew it.
When you click on a PC in packet tracer you’ll
see this screen.
Click on desktop, then command prompt, to
access the PC’s command prompt, which functions
like a windows command prompt.
Type ipconfig, and you can see the current
IP address here…...to release the IP address,
type ipconfig /release.
And now you can see already a DHCP message
on PC1.
I’ll type the next command to, to renew
the IP address.
It’s ipconfig /renew.
Now let’s check one of these DHCP messages.
Notice information all the way up to Layer
7, except layers 5 and 6.
That's because in the TCP/IP model, which
is the model actually in use, Layers 5, 6,
and 7 are all combined into a single layer
called the application layer, so you’re
not going to see any layer 5 or 6 information,
but you can consider it to be part of the
layer 7 information.
Then there is layer 4 information, if you click on it, it says
the device encapsulates the PDU into a UDP
segment, remember the Layer 4 PDU is called
a segment.
Layer 3, Layer 2, and Layer 1 information
is present as well.
Now, if I just press the play button in the
middle, it will slowly play through all of
the different messages being sent through
the network.
That’s all for this lab, I just wanted to
show you the OSI and TCP/IP models at work
on a network.
Your understanding of the functions of these
layers might still be a little unclear, but trust me,
you’ll understand things better as we start
to actually learn about these different protocols
that operate at each layer.
Thank you for watching.
That's all for this video.
If you want to show your support, please subscribe
to the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA.
I accept donations via cryptocurrency or Patreon
via the links in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
Click the link in the description to check
out ...(video cuts off early)