Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA
200-301.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Let’s get started.
In this lab we’ll finally get hands on in
the Cisco IOS CLI, the command line interface.
If you’ve already watched the Day 4 lecture
video, you should be able to complete these
tasks on your own.
Even if you can, I recommend watching this
video after to check and get any additional
explanations.
So, we’ve got a small network here with
a few PCs, and switch, and a router.
Our tasks involve some basic configurations
on the router and switch.
For this video, I will only configure the
router.
However, I recommend that you go through the
steps on both devices.
Repetition is essential to get used to all
of the commands you need to know, so remember
to configure both devices!
Step 1 is to set the appropriate hostnames
for each device, R1 and SW1.
We didn’t cover the command in the main
video, but to do so you use the ‘hostname’
command in global configuration mode.
Click on the device, and then select CLI to
access the command line interface from which
we will configure each device.
Now, in the lecture video I explained about
how to connect to the console port of a device.
In packet tracer, you can actually do that,
connect a PC to the console port of the device,
and then use the PC to do the configurations.
However, simply clicking on the device itself
is much more convenient, so that’s what
we’ll be doing for these labs.
Just keep in mind that in real life, you can’t
configure the device directly on the device
itself, you have to connect to it with a computer.
The current hostname for each device is displayed
here.
As you can see, by default the hostname is
router.
To change the hostname, we must
enter 'Global configuration' mode.
However to get there, we must first enter
'Privileged exec' mode.
This is achieved by using the 'enable' command.
To demonstrate a shortcut, I will use the
'exit' command to return to the previous exec
mode.
Notice that you can enter privileged exec
mode by simply typing 'en'.
You can also type 'en' and then use tab to
auto-complete it to 'enable', but this isn't
necessary.
'en' alone is fine.
'e', however, is too short, and we are told
this is an ambiguous command.
This is because there are other potential
commands that begin with 'e', which we can
see by tying 'e' and then a question mark.
As you can see, there are two potential commands;
enable, and exit.
So, if you just enter 'e', the router doesn't
know which command you mean.
However, 'enable' is the only command beginning
with 'en', so 'en' is all the router needs
to know which command you mean.
Now that we are in privileged exec mode, we
can use the 'configure terminal' command to
get to 'global configuration' mode.
If you want to use shortcuts again as we did
with enable and 'en', the shortest version
of the 'configure terminal' command is 'conf
t'.
From here we can set the hostname of the router.
This is done with the hostname command.
I will enter 'hostname R1'.
As you can see, the hostname has changed from
'router' to 'R1'.
Change the hostname of SW1 as well, and that’s
all for step 1.
Step 2 is to set the unencrypted enable password
on each router to CCNA.
The 'enable password' is used to enter privileged
exec mode, which is also called enable mode.
Previously we had no password set, so we were
able to enter privileged exec mode without
any password.
Now we are going to protect privileged exec
mode so that only administrators can access
it.
The command is simple, and it is done in 'global
configuration' mode, which we are already
in.
Type 'enable password CCNA'.
That's it.
Now let's test it out, which is step 3.
From here I will use the exit command twice,
once to bring me back to privileged exec mode
and then once again to bring me back to user exec
mode.
Now I will use the enable command again, however
this time I am asked for a password.
The characters do not appear as I type, however
if I type the password 'CCNA' correctly and
press enter I am brought to privileged exec
mode.
Now let's see what happens if I fail to enter
the correct password.
I enter the wrong password once, twice, and
then three times before being rejected for
having 'bad secrets'.
Now I will try again with the correct password,
and I'm in.
Step 3 is now complete.
Step 4 is simply to view the password in the
running configuration.
The running configuration is the current active configuration
of the router, whether or not you have actually
saved it.
If you turn off the router without saving
the running configuration you will lose any
changes.
If you want to keep your changes you have
to save them to the startup configuration.
To view the running configuration, use the
show running-config command from privileged
exec mode, which we are already in.
You can abbreviate it too, for example sh
run.
Enter the command, and you can see the password
right here, with the exact command we used
before, 'enable password CCNA'.
As you can see it is not encrypted, it is
written in clear text right.
Let’s solve that in step 5.
So step 4 is now complete.
Step 5 is to enable password encryption on
the devices.
We can protect passwords by encrypting them
to render them unreadable.
This is done from global configuration mode
with the command 'service password-encryption'.
Conf t.
service password-encryption.
Okay, that’s all for step 5.
Step 6 is to once again view the running config.
I will use the same command as before, and
now lets check the password.
However the command doesn't work.
That is because we are currently in global
configuration mode, and show running-config
must be entered from privileged exec mode.
Now, I could type exit to drop back to privileged
exec mode and then enter the command.
But there is one more way, which I demonstrated
in the lecture video.
If I type 'do' in front of the command, I
can enter it from global configuration mode.
'do show running-config'.
There we go.
Let's look at the password.
You can see here 'enable password', followed
by a 7 and then a string of other numbers.
The password has successfully been encrypted.
Although we didn't type this 7 when we entered
the command, it refers to the type of encryption
used.
There are other types as well.
The string of numbers that follow are the
password 'CCNA', encrypted to be unreadable
so that anyone looking over our shoulder can't
read the password.
Keep in mind that the encryption used in the
'service password-encryption' isn't very secure
and can be cracked, but this at least renders
the password safe from someone simply glancing
over your shoulder.
Step 6 is now complete.
Step 7 is to configure a more secure, encrypted
enable password of ‘Cisco’.
That can be done with the ‘enable secret’
command.
The enable secret uses MD5 encryption, which
is more secure than what you get with the
service password-encryption command.
Since we’re already in global configuration
mode, let’s enter the command.
Enable secret Cisco.
Now let’s go on to Step 8, which is to exit
back to user EXEC mode and try to login.
Exit.
Okay, now let’s try to get back to privileged
EXEC mode.
Enable.
Let’s try our original password of ‘CCNA’….it
doesn’t work anymore.
How about our newly configured enable secret?
Cisco...okay, that works.
As you can see, if both an enable secret and
enable password are configured, only the enable
secret can be used.
The enable password becomes invalid.
Step 9 is to once again view the passwords
in the running configuration.
Show running-config.
There they are.
Once again, the enable password with service
password-encryption enabled uses type 7 encryption,
indicated by this 7 here.
The enable secret uses type 5 encryption,
which is MD5 encryption.
Step 10 is to save the running configuration
to the startup configuration.
There are three ways to do this.
One is write...another is write memory...and
the third is copy running-config startup-config.
Let’s check if its saved.
Show startup-config.
There's the config, and you can see the passwords
we configured here.
If I scroll through you can see lots of other
default settings for the device here.
Step 10 is now complete.
Thank you for watching.
That's all for this video.
If you want to show your support, please subscribe
to the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA.
I accept donations via cryptocurrency or Patreon
via the links in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
Click the link in the description to check
out Brave, a fast and sleek browser that pays
you to surf the Internet.
That's all for now.