Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download and use the Anki
flashcards with the link in the description,
which will help you very much in remembering
what you've learned.
Let’s get started.
In this video we’ll take a break from IP
addresses and take a look at switch interfaces.
When we configured IP addresses, I talked
about router interfaces a little bit.
For example, we used the ‘show ip interface
brief’ command to check the Layer 1 and
Layer 2 status of the interfaces.
I also talked about how router interfaces
are disabled with the ‘shutdown’ command
by default.
This time we’ll take a look at switch interfaces
and see how they are different from router
interfaces, and also how they are the same.
Specifically, we’re going to talk about
configuring Layer 1 characteristics of these
interfaces, such as speed and duplex.
So let me introduce what we’ll cover in
this video.
I’ll talk about interface speed and duplex.
Speed refers to the data rate in bits per
second, such as 10, 100, or 1000 megabits
per second.
Duplex is something I mentioned briefly in
a previous video, basically it refers to whether
a device is able to both send AND receive
data at the same time.
I’ll talk about speed and duplex autonegotiation,
which allows two devices to negotiate speed
and duplex settings without us having to manually
configure them.
I’ll talk about interface status.
I already talked about this in the previous
video on configuring router interfaces, but
I’ll expand upon the topic.
Finally, I’ll talk about interface counters
and errors.
Cisco devices keep various counters regarding
the traffic that passes through them, such
as how many errors have occurred, etc.
I’ll show you how to find and analyze these
statistics, and what kinds of errors there
are.
Also let me review one point about switches
that I mentioned in the very first video in
this series.
Up top is a photo of a Cisco ASR 1000-X router,
and under it is a Cisco Catalyst 9200 switch.
What’s the big difference that stands out
here?
How about the number of interfaces?
The router has 8 SFP interfaces for fiber-optic
cables, and then a few RJ45 interfaces for
the console port and such.
The switch, on the other hand, has 4 SFP interfaces,
plus FORTY EIGHT RJ45 interfaces.
This is because switches are used to connect
end hosts to.
This catalyst switch might have 48 PCs connected
to the RJ45 ports, and then connect to a router
with the SFP fiber optic ports.
Next let me introduce the network topology
I’ll use for this video.
This is a single LAN, 192.168.1.0/24, with
one router, R1, two switches, SW1 and SW2,
and four PCs, PC1, 2, 3, and 4.
In a real network with two switches there
would be many more end hosts, but just for
this demonstration I’ve attached just these
four PCs.
SW1 is the device we’re going to focus on
today, configuring its network interfaces,
including F0/1, F0/2, F0/3, and F0/4 which
are connected, as well as the remaining interfaces
which are not connected at the moment.
Let’s go right into the CLI of SW1.
First I use ‘enable’ to enter privileged
exec mode.
After entering privileged exec mode, I entered
the ‘show ip interface brief’, using shortcuts.
As you can see, the four interfaces which
are connected to devices, fastethernet 0/1,
0/2, 0/3, and 0/4 have a status column, which
is the Layer 1 status, and a protocol column,
which is the Layer 2 status, of UP and UP.
We usually call this up/up.
Keep in mind I haven’t done any configuration
on SW1 yet except set the hostname.
So already we can see a difference between
Cisco routers and switches.
What is that?
Well, I mentioned briefly in the Day 8
video,
router interfaces are in an administratively
disabled state by default, meaning they have
the ‘shutdown’ command applied.
Switch interfaces, however, are different.
They don’t have the shutdown command applied,
so if you connect them to another device they’ll
usually be in the up/up state with no configuration
required.
Now, the IP address is unassigned, and it
will remain that way because these are layer
2 switchports, they don't need an IP address.
The concept of multilayer switching, where
you actually DO assign IP addresses to switches,
will be for a future lesson.
For this lesson, don’t worry about the IP
address column.
Now take a look at the other interfaces, keep
in mind I’m ignoring the ‘VLAN1’ virtual
interface, that will be a topic for another
video.
These other interfaces aren’t connected
to any other devices, so their status is down/down.
Keep in mind, down and down is different than
administratively down and down.
Here’s the show ip interface brief command
on a router, notice administratively down
and down, this is because of the ‘shutdown’
command’.
‘DOWN/DOWN’ doesn’t mean the interfaces
are shutdown, it means they aren’t connected
to another device.
So, to summarize, router interfaces have the
shutdown command applied by default, so they
will be in the administratively down/down
state by default.
Switch interfaces do not have the shutdown
command applied by default, so they will either
be in the up/up state, if they are connected to another
device, or the down/down state, if not connected.
Now let’s look at another useful command
to check on switch interfaces.
That is ‘show interfaces status’.
Let’s look at each field of the output.
First, the port field simply lists each interface.
Next, you might be wondering what this ‘name’
field is.
Well, its the description of the interface.
I’m not sure why they called it ‘name’
and not ‘description’, but we’ll configure
descriptions on these interfaces and you’ll
see that it appears here.
Next is the status field.
As you can see this is different than the
status field of show ip interface brief.
The four connected interfaces show a status
of ‘connected, and the unconnected interfaces
show a status of ‘notconnect’.
There are other possible statuses, we’ll
cover them as they come up in the course.
Next is the VLAN field.
VLANs will get their own video, basically
they can be used to divide LANs into smaller
LANs.
As you can see, the default VLAN is 1.
The only one that does not show a VLAN of
1 is F0/2, which shows trunk.
I won’t explain trunks now, they’ll be
covered in the VLAN video.
Just take note of the fact that the interface
connected to the other switch, SW2, is a trunk
interface.
Next is the duplex field, which as I mentioned
before indicates whether the device is capable
of both sending and receiving data at the
same time, which is known as full-duplex,
or if its not, which is called half-duplex.
Duplex is auto by default on Cisco switches,
meaning it will negotiate with the neighboring
device and use full-duplex if possible.
Notice that all of the unconnected interfaces
have a duplex of auto, and the connected interfaces
have a duplex of ‘a dash full’ Well, the
‘a’ stands for auto, and it means that
it automatically negotiated a duplex of auto
with the neighboring device.
Next is the speed field, which is also auto
by default.
These are fastethernet interfaces, so they
are capable of speeds up to 100 megabits per
second.
However, they are also capable of operating
at 10 megabits per second.
Auto means they are able to negotiate with
the device they are connected to and use the
fastest speed both devices are capable of.
This time, we see ‘a DASH 100’, meaning
a speed of 100 megabits per second was auto-negotiated
with the neighboring device.
I’ll talk in more detail about auto negotiation
soon.
Okay, finally is the Type field.
These are all RJ45 interfaces for copper UTP
cables, but if they were small form-factor
pluggable, or SFP, modules, you’d see that
here instead.
In this case, we see 10/100BASE-TX, the 10/100
of course referring to the speeds at which
these interfaces can operate.
Autonegotiation works well so usually you’ll
leave it be, but lets go and manually configure
the speed and duplex of an interface, F0/1
which is connected to R1.
As you can see, I enter interface config mode,
and then use the command speed.
I use the context-sensitive help to display
the next option, and I can choose between
10 or 100 megabits per second, or auto.
So, I set the speed to 100, since R1’s interface
is a fastethernet interface also.
Then, I use the command ‘duplex’ to set
the duplex of the interface.
As the context-sensitive help shows, I can
choose between auto, which is the default, or full
and half.
Both SW1 and R1 support full duplex, so I
choose that.
Finally, I configure a description on the
interface, indicating that it is connected
to R1.
Okay, so when I use the ‘show interfaces
status’ command once again, you can see
both the configured description and the configured
speed and duplex.
Notice the duplex is full, rather than a dash
full, and the speed is 100, rather than a
dash 100, because they are not being autonegotiated
any more.
Once again, normally you will keep autonegotiation
on, but if perhaps there is some problem and
its not working, you should know how to manually
configure the speed and duplex of an interface.
Now, let me quickly do some configurations
for the other connected interfaces off-camera…
Okay, so I just configured descriptions on
F0/2, 0/3, and 0/4.
Now, how about the unused interfaces?
Although the fact that switch interfaces are
enabled by default is convenient, as you can
just plug a device in and use it straight
away, it can be a security concern.
Really, you should disable the interfaces.
Fortunately, instead of having to configure
each of the 8 interfaces one by one, there
is a way to configure all 8 interfaces at
once.
Here’s the command that can save you a lot
of time.
From global config mode, type ‘interface
range’, and then enter the range like this,
f0/5 to 12.
This time, instead of interface config mode,
I am brought to interface range config mode,
and I enter a description, and then shut down
the interfaces.
All at once, I get messages saying the interfaces
have changed to administratively down.
Now, before we check show interfaces status
once more, let me show you a cool thing about
this command.
The interfaces in the range don’t all have
to be consecutive.
For example, if I later want to enter fastethernet
0/5, 6, 9, 10, 11, and 12, but leave 7 and
8 shutdown, I can do this: interface range
f0/5 to 6, COMMA, f0/9 to 12.
Then if I issue ‘no shutdown’, you can
see only those interfaces and enabled.
F0/7 and 8 remain down.
Okay, so I shutdown interfaces f0/5,6,9,10,11,
and 12 again, and here’s the output of show
interfaces status again.
Now you can see the description of each interface,
and the status is disabled.
Once again, this status is different than the
status shown in ‘show ip interface brief’,
which will now be ‘administratively down’,
although really they mean the same thing.
Before talking about autonegotiation, I want
to explain full and half duplex.
I have briefly mentioned it a few times, but
haven’t explained it in depth yet.
Half duplex means that the device cannot send
and receive data at the same time.
If it is receiving a frame, it must wait before
sending a frame.
Full duplex means that the device CAN send
and receive data at the same time.
It does not have to wait.
Clearly, full duplex is the preferred way
to go.
In modern networks that use switches, all
devices can use full duplex on their interfaces.
So, you may be wondering where is half-duplex
used?
Well, in modern day networks, almost nowhere.
But to understand half-duplex let me introduce
you to an old type of network device which
was around before the network switch.
The hub is much simpler than a switch, in
fact it is simply a repeater.
Any frame it receives, it floods
like a switch does with a broadcast or unknown
unicast frame.
For example, if PC1 wants to send a frame
to PC2, it will send the frame out of its
network interface,
and after the hub receives it, it will repeat
the frame out of its other interfaces, to
PC2 and PC3.
PC3 will recognize that the destination MAC
Address is not its own and ignore the frame,
and PC2 will receive it normally.
Now, what if two PCs try to send frames at
the same time?
In this case, PC1 is trying to send a frame
to PC2, and PC3 is trying to send a frame
to PC1.
They both send the frames out of their network
interfaces,
and this is where a problem occurs.
The hub won’t send one first and then send
the other after, it simply tries to flood
both at the same time, and this will result
in a collision on the interface, and PC2 won’t
receive either frame intact.
All devices connected to a hub are part of
what’s called a collision domain.
The frames they send could collide with frames
any of the other devices connected to the
hub send.
To deal with collisions in a half-duplex situation
like this, Ethernet devices use a mechanism
called ‘CSMA/CD’.
Let’s check it out.
CSMA/CD stands for ‘carrier sense multiple
access with collision detection’.
It describes how devices avoid collisions
in a half-duplex situation, and how they react
if collisions do occur.
It works like this.
Before sending frames, devices listen to the
collision domain until they detect that other
devices are not sending frames.
If a collision does occur, which can still
happen because of bad timing and such, the
device sends a jamming signal to inform the
other devices that a collision happened.
Each device then waits a random period of
time before sending frames agan.
The process then repeats, with each device
listening to check if other devices are sending
frames before sending their own frames.
Now, that process works, and it was how networks
operated for a long time.
But switches are more sophisticated than hubs.
Hubs are simple repeaters which operate at
layer 1, repeating whatever signals they receive.
Switches operate at layer 2, using layer 2
addressing, MAC addresses, to send frames
to specific hosts.
They also won’t try to send two frames to
the same host at once.
So, this network which was one collision domain
when connected to a hub, is now 1, 2, 3 collision
domains.
Because of the improved functionality of switches
over hubs, these devices can now operate in
full duplex, meaning they don’t have to
worry about whether or not other devices are
sending data at the same time, they can send
data freely.
Although problems like collisions still do
occur, they are rare and usually are a sign
of a problem, like a misconfiguration, rather
than a regular occurrence like in a half-duplex
network.
So let’s review half and full duplex once
more.
In half duplex, the device cannot send and
receive data at the same time.
If it is receiving a frame, it must wait before
sending a frame.
Devices attached to a hub must operate in
half duplex.
In modern networks, you’re probably not
going to use a hub, but it’s a possibility.
In full duplex, the device can send and receive
data at the same time, it does not have to
wait.
Devices attached to a switch can operate in
full duplex.
Okay, now that you know what duplex is let’s
talk about speed and duplex autonegotiation
on interfaces, and this applies to both routers
and switches by the way.
Interfaces that can run at different speeds,
for example 10/100 or 10/100/1000, have default
settings of speed auto and duplex auto.
Interfaces advertise their capabilities to
their neighbors, and they negotiate the best
speed and duplex settings they are both capable
of.
So, let’s look at an example.
Here’s a small network, a switch with three
PCs connected.
Connected to G0/1 is a PC with a regular ethernet
interface.
Connected to G0/2 is a PC with a fastethernet
interface. and connected to G0/3 is a PC with
a gigabit ethernet interface.
As you probably know by now, an Ethernet
interface can run at 10 megabits per second,
a fastethernet interface can run at 10 or
100 megabits per second, and a gigabit ethernet
interface can run at 10, 100, or 1000 gigabits
per second.
So, G0/1 and the PC will negotiate to a speed
of 10 megabits per second, and full duplex.
G0/2 and the PC will negotiate to a speed
of 100 and full duplex.
And g0/3 and the PC will negotiate to speed
1000 and full duplex.
The PCs are all able to use the max speed
of their network interfaces, and the switch
adjusts the speeds of its interfaces to match.
In a network like this with all PCs and switches,
there’s no reason to use half-duplex, so
they all negotiate to use full-duplex.
Now, let’s talk about another situation.
What if autonegotiation is disabled on the
device connected to the switch?
So, the switch is trying to autonegotiate,
but the other devices don't respond.
Well, this is how the switch will respond.
For the speed, the switch will try to sense
the speed that the other device is operating
at.
If it fails to sense the speed, it will use
the slowest supported speed, for example 10
Mbps on a 10/100/1000 interface.
Now, as for duplex, if it ends up using a
speed of 10 or 100 mbps, the switch will use
half duplex.
If the speed is 1000 mbps or greater, it will
use full duplex.
So let’s see how this works.
In this case, only the switch is using autonegotiation,
and the three PCs have manual, fixed speed
and duplex settings.
We’ll also assume that the switch successfully
detects the speed that the PCs are using.
The Green PC has a speed of 10 Mbps, so the
switch detects that and sets its speed to
the same.
Because its speed is 10 Mbps, it sets its
speed to half duplex.
Now, how about G0/2, connected to the Red
PC?
It senses that the PC is using a speed of
1000 mbps, so it uses the same.
Because the speed is 1000 Mbps, it uses full
duplex.
Now how about G0/3, connected to the blue
PC?
It senses the speed of 100 mbps, but then
what about the duplex?
The PC is using full duplex, but without autonegotiation
the switch cant sense that.
So, because the speed is 100 Mbps, the switch
uses half duplex.
This results in a duplex mismatch, which will
cause collisions to occur, resulting in poor
network performance.
So, really you should be using autonegotiation
on all devices in the network.
Now let’s take a look at some of the errors
that can show up on interfaces that otherwise
seem to be working.
The switch will take count of some of these
things and you can view them with the ‘show
interfaces’ command.
We took a quick look at this command when
we were configuring router interfaces, so
these things aren’t specific for switch
interfaces.
This time, let’s focus on some of these
statistics at the bottom.
There are lots of different kinds of counters
shown here and you don’t have to know all
of them at this point, so let’s just focus
on some.
First up, not errors, but you can see the
total number of packets received on the interface,
and the total number of bytes in those packets.
Next up is runts.
These are frames that are smaller than the
minimum Ethernet frame size of 64 bytes.
Beside the runts counter is the giants counter,
which counts received frames which are larger
than the ethernet maximum frame size of 1518
bytes.
Next up, CRC, which counts frames which failed
their CRC check.
If you remember, the CRC is the cyclic redundancy
check done via the FCS, or frame check sequence,
in the trailer of an ethernet frame.
It’s used to detect errors, and if an error
is detected this counter goes up.
Next is frame, which counts frames that have
an incorrect or illegal format.
Input errors is a total of various counters,
including the four I just mentioned.
Finally, output errors counts frames the switch
tried to send, but failed due to an error.
Keep in mind, I’m showing you all of these
counters on a switch, but they are the same
on a router.
Before moving on to today’s quiz, let’s
review what we covered.
We talked about interface speed and duplex.
I explained the concepts of full and half
duplex.
Full duplex is preferred, and in most modern
networks all devices will be able to operate
in full duplex, so they can send data freely
without waiting for other devices to stop
sending.
We talked about speed and duplex autonegotiation,
which allows devices to find the appropriate
speed and duplex settings without manual configuration.
We looked a bit at interfaces status using
the ‘show interface status’ command, such
as the statuses connected, notconnect, and
disabled.
We’ll look more at this throughout the course.
Finally, we looked at some interface counters
and errors such as runts, which are frames
that don’t meet the minimum size requirements,
and giants, which exceed the maximum frame
size requirements.
Okay, let’s get started on the quiz.
Remember, there will also be flashcards which
you can download from the link in the description
to help you remember what you learned in this
video.
Let’s go to question 1.
There is a duplex mismatch between SW1’s
F0/1 interface and SW2’s F0/1 interface,
which are connected.
Autonegotiation is disabled.
What will be the result?
A, improved performance.
B, collisions will occur.
Or C, SW1 will sense SW2’s duplex setting
and adjust to match.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, collisions will occur.
The half duplex side is unable to send and
receive data at the same time.
However, the full duplex side is unaware of
this, and will send data even if the half
duplex side isn’t ready to receive it, causing
collisions.
So, B is correct.
It definitely won’t result in improved performance,
in fact performance will probably be much
worse, so A is incorrect.
SW1 won’t be able to sense SW2’s duplex
setting without autonegotiation enabled, so
C is incorrect too.
Let’s go to question 2.
What is used on half-duplex interfaces to
detect and avoid collisions?
A, CSMA/CD, B, CSMA/CA.
C, Autonegotiation, or D, Duplex Auto.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is a, CSMA/CD.
CSMA CD stands for carrier sense multiple
access with collision detection.
It describes how devices using half-duplex
listen for activity on a network segment,
and then send data only when other devices
aren't sending.
It also describes how a device will react
when a collision does occur.
So A, CSMA/CD is correct.
B, CSMA/CA, is a similar concept that we’ll
cover later in the course that stands for
carrier sense multiple access with collision
avoidance.
C, autonegotiation, and D, duplex auto, are
unrelated to how a half-duplex interface detects
and avoids collisions.
Let’s go to question 3.
Which command shows various counters of errors
detected on an interface?
A, show interfaces.
B, show ip interface brief.
C, show interfaces status.
Or D, show interfaces errors.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is A, show interfaces.
Let’s check the output of each command.
As you can see, show ip interface brief doesn’t
display any counters of errors detected on the
interface.
It’s a useful command for checking the IP
addresses of interfaces, checking if they’re
shutdown, etc.
Show interfaces status also doesn’t show
any error counters.
It gives some basic information about interfaces
such as description, status, duplex and speed.
show interfaces errors isn’t a real command,
so an error message appears when I try to
enter it.
Show interfaces displays counters of errors
detected on the interface.
In this case I used ‘show interface f0/1.
Because so much information is given for each
interface, you probably won’t use this command
to view all interfaces at once, but rather
specify an individual interface to check.
The counters are at the bottom of the output.
So A, show interfaces, is correct.
Let’s go to question 4.
Which are examples of errors that might occur
on a network interface?
A, runts, giants, broadcasts.
B, shorts, longs, oversizes.
C, packets, bytes, inputs, outputs.
D, runts, giants, CRC.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is D, runts, giants, CRC.
The names in B and C are not real errors that
can occur on an interface.
In option A, runts and giants are possible
errors, but broadcasts are not errors, they
are part of normal network operations.
So D, runts, giants, CRC, is the correct answer.
Remember, Runts are frames that are too small,
Giants are frames that are too big, and CRC
counts the frames that failed their CRC check,
which is done in the frame check sequence
in the trailer of the ethernet frame.
Let’s go to question 5.
SW1 is trying to autonegotiate interface speed
settings with SW2.
However, autonegotiation is disabled on SW2’s
interface.
SW2’s interface is configured with a speed
of 100 Mbps and full duplex.
What speed and duplex settings will SW1 use?
A, speed 100 megabits per second, duplex full.
B, speed 100 megabits per second, duplex half.
C, speed 10 megabits per second, duplex full.
Or D, Speed 10 megabits per second, duplex
half.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, speed 100 megabits per second,
duplex half.
If the remote device has autonegotiation disabled,
but it's enabled on the local device, the local
device will attempt to sense the speed the
remote device is using, so SW1 will be able
to correctly set its interface speed to 100
megabits per second to match SW2’s.
However, it can't sense the duplex mode of
SW2’s interface, so the rule is if the speed
is 10 or 100 megabits per second, half duplex
will be used, otherwise full duplex will be
used.
In this case, half duplex will be used, which
will result in a duplex mismatch between the
two devices, and probably poor performance
on the link between them due to collisions.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Remember to make use of the supplemental materials
for this video, I’ve made a set of flash
cards to be used with the flashcard software
Anki to help you remember what you learned
in the video.
Also, there will also be a packet tracer practice
lab to give you hands-on practice configuring
Cisco devices.
That will be the next video.
Good luck with your studies.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.