Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will continue with the topic
of VLANs, Virtual Local Area Networks.
In the last video, Day 16, we covered the
absolute basics of VLANs, what a VLAN is,
what their purpose is, and the most basic
VLAN configurations.
However, that’s not really enough information,
there is still more basic knowledge you need
to be able to understand and use VLANs.
That’s what we’ll cover in today’s video.
So let’s take a look at what we’ll cover, exactly.
This will be a fairly long video I think,
but let’s take it step by step.
First of all, what is a trunk port?
I mentioned trunk ports briefly in the last
video.
Whereas an access port belongs to a single
VLAN, trunk ports carry traffic from multiple
VLANs on a single interface.
Next, what is the purpose of trunk ports?
How are they actually used?
Next I will talk about 802.1Q encapsulation.
This is an additonal tag added to an Ethernet
frame which is used to identify which VLAN
traffic belongs to on a trunk.
Next, we’ll go into trunk port configuration,
it’s not so complicated, you only need to
learn a few more commands.
Finally, we’ll cover ‘router on a stick’.
It’s a bit of an odd name, but this is something
you really need to know for your CCNA.
It’s a more efficient way of performing
inter-VLAN routing, an alternative to using
a separate router interface for every VLAN.
So, let’s get started.
For a quick review, here is the network topology
used in the last video.
There is a single switch, and three VLANs.
All of the switch interfaces are access ports
which belong to a single VLAN, either VLAN10,
VLAN20, or VLAN30.
Three interfaces are used to connect to the
router, one for each VLAN.
For this video, let’s use a different network
topology.
Here’s the network topology we’ll start
with for this lesson.
This time, there are two switches used.
Note that VLAN10, the VLAN for the engineering
department, is split between the two switches.
This is very common, as departments in a company
aren’t always split up exactly by location.
You might have some engineers on one
floor of the building, for example, and some
on another floor.
We are still using only access ports.
There are two links between SW1 and SW2, one
for VLAN10, and one for VLAN30.
There must be a link in VLAN10 between the
two switches because VLAN10 PCs are connected
to both SW1 and SW2, and also because the
PCs connected to SW1 need to be able to reach
R1 via SW2.
As for the link in VLAN30, it is necessary
because PCs in VLAN30 also need to be
able to reach R1 via SW2.
There is no link in VLAN20 between SW1 and
SW2.
This is because there are no PCs in VLAN20
connected to SW1.
PCs in VLAN20 can still reach PCs connected
to SW1, R1 will perform the inter-VLAN routing.
Let me demonstrate that inter-VLAN routing.
Let’s say this PC in VLAN20 wants to send
traffic to one of the VLAN10 PCs connected
to SW1.
It will send the frame with a destination
MAC address of R1, its default gateway.
R1 then forwards it back to SW2.
Note that this traffic arrived at SW2 on the
VLAN10 interface, the traffic is now in VLAN10,
so it forwards it to SW1 on the VLAN10 connection
between them, and then SW1 forwards the traffic
to the destination PC.
So, you can see that, even though there isn’t
a VLAN20 connection between SW2 and SW1, the
PC in VLAN20 can still send traffic to the
PC in VLAN10, because the router performs
inter-VLAN routing.
In a small network with few VLANs, it is possible
to use a separate interface for each VLAN
when connecting switches to switches, and
switches to routers.
However, when the number of VLANs increases,
this is not viable.
It will result in wasted interfaces, and often
routers won’t have enough interfaces for
each VLAN.
You can use 'trunk ports' to carry traffic from
multiple VLANs over a single interface.
Once again, these are different than access ports, which belong to a single VLAN only.
Let’s take a quick look at how trunk ports
work.
So, now I’ve replaced those separate connections
for each VLAN, with a single connection
between SW1 and SW2, and SW2 and R1.
However, to make it more clear, let’s add
those colors back.
Okay, so now you can see which VLANs are allowed
on each trunk.
Remember, these are single physical connections,
but traffic from multiple VLANs is allowed
over each trunk.
Let’s say this PC in VLAN10 wants to send
some data to this other PC in VLAN 10.
It sends the traffic to SW2, which then sends
it to SW1.
Now here’s a question.
How does SW1 know which VLAN the traffic belongs
to?
Both VLANs 10 and 30 are allowed on the interface
the traffic was received on, but how does
SW1 know which VLAN it belongs to?
The answer is VLAN tagging.
Switches will ‘tag’ all frames that they
send over a trunk link.
This allows the receiving switch to know which
VLAN the frame belongs to.
In fact, another name for a trunk port is
a ‘tagged’ port, and another name for
an access port is an ‘untagged’ port.
Frames sent over access ports aren’t tagged,
they don’t need to be tagged because the
interface belongs to a single VLAN.
If a frame arrives on a switchport in VLAN10,
the switch knows the frame is in VLAN10.
Let’s talk about those VLAN tags.
There are two main trunking protocols: ISL
(Inter-Switch Link) and IEEE 802.1Q. Usually,
we call 802.1Q ‘dot1q’.
ISL is an old Cisco proprietary protocol,
created before the industry standard IEEE
802.1Q. Dot1q is an industry standard
protocol created by the IEEE (Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
Remember the IEEE?
How about IEEE 802.3?
That’s Ethernet, another industry standard
protocol.
You will probably NEVER use ISL in the real
world.
Even modern Cisco equipment doesn’t support
it.
For the CCNA, you only need to learn dot1q.
You should know what ISL is, but you don’t
have to study it like dot1q.
Okay here’s an old slide, back from Day
5 on Ethernet switching.
Do you remember the fields of the Ethernet
header and trailer?
If you don’t, I recommend going back to
check out Day 5’s video, I won’t waste
time explaining it all again here.
However, the reason I am showing this is because
the dot1q tag is actually inserted between
two fields of the Ethernet header.
So, here’s just the Ethernet header.
Dot1q inserts a 4-byte, or 32-bit field between
two fields of this Ethernet header.
Let’s take a look.
As you can see here, the dot1q tag is inserted
between the source MAC address and the type
or length fields of the Ethernet header.
Let’s go over some basics.
As I just said, the 802.1Q tag is inserted
between the Source and Type/Length fields
of the Ethernet frame.
The tag is 4 bytes, or 32 bits, in length.
The tag consists of two main fields.
Those are the Tag Protocol Identifier, TPID,
and the Tag Control Information, TCI.
The TCI itself consists of three sub-fields.
Let’s quickly take a look at each field
of the dot1q tag.
Here’s a diagram of the dot1q tag format,
thanks to wikipedia.
Notice that it can be divided into two halves,
the TPID and TCI I mentioned before.
Also, the TCI can be divided into three sub
fields, the PCP, DEI, and VID.
Okay first up lets look at the TPID field.
The field is 16 bits, or 2 bytes, in length,
taking up half of the 802.1Q tag’s length.
The TPID is ALWAYS set to a value of 0x8100.
Remember, 0x just means hexadecimal, so the actual
value in the field is 8 1 0 0, four hexadecimal
digits.
Each hexadecimal digit is 4 bits, so 4 x 4
is 16, the total length of the field.
This value of 8 1 0 0 indicates that the frame
is dot1q-tagged.
As I just showed you, the dot1q tag comes
after the source MAC field of the Ethernet
frame.
This is where the TYPE field is usually located.
When the switch sees this value of 8 1 0 0
here, it knows it’s a dot1q-tagged frame.
Okay, that’s all for the TPID field.
Next up let’s look at the first field of
the TCI, which is the PCP, or Priority Code
Point.
The field is 3 bits in length.
It is used for Class of Service, CoS, which
prioritizes important traffic in congested
networks.
Don’t worry about this field too much, just
know the name and that it is used for CoS.
Next up is the DEI, Drop Eligible Indicator.
This field is just a single bit in length.
It is used to indicate frames that can be
dropped if the network is congested, which
makes sure more important network traffic
gets through.
Once again, you don’t really need to worry
about this field too much for your CCNA, just
know the name and it’s basic purpose.
Okay, finally is a very important field, the
VID, or VLAN ID field.
It is 12 bits in length.
It is the field that actually identifies the
VLAN the frame belongs to, so you could say
this is the most important field of the dot1q
tag.
Because this field is 12 bits in length, that
means there are 4096 total VLANs, because
2 to the power of 12 equals 4096.
However, the first and last VLANs, 0 and 4095,
are reserved and can’t be used.
Therefore, the actual range of VLANs that
can be used is 1 to 4094.
By the way, Cisco’s proprietary ISL, which
is an alternative protocol for VLAN tagging
over trunk connections, also uses a VLAN range
of 1 to 4094.
As I mentioned before, however, you don’t
really need to know ISL, it’s almost been
completely replaced by the industry standard
dot1q.
So, those are the fields of the dot1q tag.
Take a look at this diagram, do you remember
the names of each section and their basic
function?
If you want to read a little bit about dot1q,
I recommend checking out the wikipedia page
for a solid overview of it.
Okay let me talk about the VLAN ranges a little
bit more.
The range of VLANs, which as I mentioned is
1 to 4094, is divided into two sections.
'normal VLANs', which are numbered from 1 to
1005, and 'extended VLANs', which are numbered
from 1006 to 4094.
Some older devices cannot use the extended
VLAN range, however it’s safe to expect
that modern switches will support the extended
VLAN range.
I work with Cisco switches a lot in my job,
and I’ve never encountered a switch that
doesn’t support the entire range, from 1
to 4094.
Just be aware that some older switches might
not support the extended range.
Okay, so let’s look at this diagram once again.
So, this PC in VLAN10 wants to send
traffic to this other PC in VLAN10.
The traffic goes to SW2, which then forwards
it to SW1, with a tag indicating that the
traffic belongs to VLAN10.
SW1 receives the frame, and because the destination
is also in VLAN10, it will forward the traffic
to the destination.
Remember, a standard layer 2 switch like this
will only forward traffic in the same VLAN,
it will not forward traffic between VLANs.
Let me introduce another concept of dot1q.
Dot1q has a feature called the NATIVE VLAN.
Cisco’s ISL does not have this feature,
by the way.
The native VLAN is VLAN 1 by default on all
trunk ports, however this can be manually
configured on each trunk port.
It’s important to remember that this has
to be configured on each trunk port separately, it’s not
a global configuration on the switch.
Now, what exactly does the native VLAN do?
The switch does not add an 802.1Q tag to frames
in the native VLAN.
It will forward the frame normally, without
adding the dot1q tag to it.
So, what does the receiving switch do when
it receives this untagged frame on a trunk
port?
When a switch receives an untagged frame on
a trunk port, it assumes the frame belongs
to the native VLAN.
So, it’s very important that the native
VLAN matches between switches!
Switches will still forward traffic if there
is a native VLAN mismatch, but problems may
occur.
Let’s look at an example.
This time, let’s say I’ve configured the
native VLAN to be VLAN10 on the trunk link
between SW1 and SW2.
Let’s follow some traffic on the same path
as usual.
This PC sends the traffic to SW2.
It will send the traffic to SW1, but because
it is in the native VLAN, VLAN10, it won’t
tag it as being in VLAN10.
The untagged frame arrives at SW1, which assumes
that the traffic belongs to VLAN10, so it
forwards it to the destination.
This time, let’s look at if there is a native
VLAN mismatch configuration.
On SW2’s interface I’ve configured VLAN10
as the native VLAN.
However, on SW1’s interface I’ve configured
VLAN30 as the native VLAN.
Let’s see what happens.
Up to the point the traffic reaches SW1, it’s
the same.
However, when SW1 receives the frame this
is what it will think.
This frame has no VLAN tag.
Therefore, it must belong to VLAN30.
But, the destination is in VLAN10, not VLAN30.
So, I won’t forward the frame.
So, I think you can see why it is important
that the native VLAN configuration matches
between switches.
Okay, let's finally get into the
configuration of trunk ports.
I’ve added the interface numbers to the
diagram to make it easier to understand.
So, we will be configuring G0/0 on SW1,
and G0/0 and G0/1 on SW2 as trunk ports.
Let’s go on SW1 first.
First let’s look at the most basic trunk
configuration, manually configuring the interface
as a trunk.
After entering interface configuration mode,
use this command, SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK to
manually configure the interface as a trunk.
However, in this case we got an error message.
Command rejected, an interface whose trunk
encapsulation is ‘AUTO’ can not be configured
to ‘trunk’ mode.
This is a little tricky.
Many modern switches do not support Cisco’s
ISL at all.
They only support dot1q.
Even though ISL is a proprietary Cisco protocol,
even Cisco switches are moving toward supporting
only dot1q.
However, switches that do support both dot1q
and ISL (like the one I’m using in this
example) have a trunk encapsulation of ‘Auto’
by default.
To manually configure the interface as a trunk
port, you must first set the encapsulation
to 802.1Q or ISL.
On switches that only support dot1q, this
is not necessary.
After you set the encapsulation type, you
can then configure the interface as a trunk.
So, let’s see how to set the encapsulation
type.
You use the SWITCHPORT TRUNK ENCAPSULATION
command.
I used the question mark to see the options.
There are dot1q, isl, and negotiate.
Negotiate sets it to AUTO mode, so we cant
choose that.
I will talk more about AUTO mode in the next
lecture video, by the way, so if you have
questions I will answer them there.
I set the encapsulation to dot1q, and then
this time the SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK command
is accepted.
On switches that only support dot1q, you will
ONLY need the switchport mode trunk command,
but on some switches you will need to set
the encapsulation first.
I used the SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK command to
confirm.
First up, the trunk interfaces are listed
here.
'Mode on' means that the interface was manually
configured as a trunk.
In the next lecture we will look at how a
port can automatically become a trunk without
configuration, but we’ll forget about that
for the moment.
Encapsulation is dot1q as we configured, status
is trunking, and the native VLAN, which I
mentioned before, is the default of 1.
Under that, the VLANs allowed on the trunk
are displayed.
By the default, ALL VLANs, 1 to 4094, are
allowed on the trunk.
However, for security purposes, we might want
to limit which VLANs can be forwarded on the
trunk, so we’ll look at that configuration next.
Next up is VLANs allowed and active in management
domain.
This includes the default VLAN of 1, as well
as VLANs 10 and 30, which I already configured
on this switch.
Note that, although VLAN1, which exists by
default, appears here, VLANs 1002 to 1005,
which I showed you in the previous lecture
video, do not.
As I mentioned before, don’t worry about
those VLANs, they’re not really used in
modern networks.
The last field of the SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK
command is ‘Vlans in spanning tree forwarding
state and not pruned’.
I’ll talk about this in a future lecture,
we don’t know about spanning tree and VLAN
pruning yet.
Here is the command to configure the VLANs
allowed on a trunk.
SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED VLAN, and then there
are some options.
WORD allows you to simply configure the list
of VLANs allowed.
Let’s see how that works.
So, I used the command SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED
VLAN 10 comma 30.
Notice that the SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK command
now only shows VLANs 10 and 30 as being allowed
on the trunk.
Now let’s take a look at the ADD option.
This allows you to add allowed VLANs to the
currently existing list.
Currently VLANs 10 and 30 are allowed, let’s
say I also want to add 20, even though no
hosts in VLAN20 are connected to SW1.
This time I used the command SWITCHPORT TRUNK
ALLOWED VLAN ADD 20.
The SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK command now shows
vlans 10,20, and 30 as allowed, so 20 was
added to the list.
Note that, because I haven’t actually created
VLAN20 on this switch, VLAN20 still isn’t
displayed in the VLANs allowed and active
in management domain section.
Next up I’ll show you the ‘remove’ option.
VLAN20 isn’t necessary on this trunk, so
let’s remove it.
I used the command SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED
VLAN REMOVE 20.
Now, as you can see, VLAN20 has been removed
from the list of allowed VLANs, leaving only
VLANs 10 and 30.
Next up lets look at the ALL option.
I think this one is fairly obvious, but lets
take a look anyway.
This time I used the command SWITCHPORT TRUNK
ALLOWED VLAN ALL.
Now all VLANs are allowed on the trunk.
This is the same as the default state, as
all VLANs are allowed by default.
Next up lets look at the EXCEPT option.
It allows all VLANS except the ones you specify.
Let’s check it out.
I used the command SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED
VLAN EXCEPT 1 to 5, comma 10.
As you can see it allows all VLANs except
those, so 6 to 9, and 11 to 4094…
Okay, finally let’s look at the NONE option,
which is also pretty easy to understand.
This time I used the command SWITCHPORT TRUNK
ALLOWED VLAN NONE, and as you can see no VLANs
are allowed on the trunk.
This effectively allows no traffic to pass
over the trunk, so now let’s do the actual
settings we want for this network.
Here’s the diagram once more.
SW1 has hosts in VLAN 10 and VLAN 30 connected
to it.
No hosts in VLAN20 are connected, so there’s
no need to allow VLAN20 on the trunk between
SW1 and SW2.
So, let’s set the allowed VLANs to 10 and
30 like we did before.
Okay, there we go.
Now the only VLANs allowed on the trunk are
VLANs 10 and 30.
The reason to do this is for security purposes,
to make sure only traffic in the necessary
VLANs can use that connection.
Also, for network performance purposes, this
avoids unncessary traffic, because broadcasts
and such in other VLANs won’t be sent over
the trunk.
Now, I said I’d show you how to change the
native VLAN.
For security purposes, it is best to change
the native VLAN to an unused VLAN.
Network security will be explained more in-depth
later in the course.
This video is already getting long so I won’t
explain the detailed reasons, but again it’s
about limiting unnecessary traffic in the
network, and controlling what traffic is allowed.
Also, remember to make the native VLAN match
between switches.
Now let’s look at how to change the native
VLAN.
The command to change the native VLAN is SWITCHPORT
TRUNK NATIVE VLAN, followed by the VLAN number.
I chose an unused VLAN, 1001.
As you can see, the native VLAN has now been
changed to 1001.
After configuring this trunk port, I did the SHOW VLAN BRIEF command.
Notice that G0/0 is not listed anywhere.  Not in VLAN10 or VLAN30,
even though those are the VLANs allowed on the trunk.
This is because the SHOW VLAN BRIEF command shows the access ports assigned to each VLAN,
not the trunk ports that allow each VLAN.
Use the SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK command instead to confirm trunk ports.
Now that we’ve seen the configurations
on SW1, I’ll quickly do the configurations
on SW2 as well.
On SW2’s G0/0 interface, we must allow VLANs
10 and 30.
On SW2’s G0/1 interface, however, we must
allow VLAN 20 as well.
Here are the configurations for SW2’s G0/0
interface, the interface connected to SW1.
These are the same as before, so I won’t go
through each one.
You can pause the video if you want to take a look
at them to review.
Now let’s move on to G0/1, which is connected
to R1.
Okay, here are the configurations.
Almost identical to G0/0, except I allowed
VLAN20 in addition to VLAN 10 and 30.
Now, both G0/0 and G0/1 are displayed in the
output of the SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK command.
So, that’s all for the switch configurations
for this lesson.
However, you may be wondering about the router.
In the previous lecture, we used three separate
interfaces for the connection from SW2 to
R1, and assigned a separate IP address to
each one on R1.
Each one served as the default gateway address
for the PCs in each VLAN.
However, now we are using only one physical
connection between the two devices.
So, we must use ‘subinterfaces’ on
R1.
Let’s take a look.
First of all, look at the title of the slide.
ROUTER ON A STICK, also written as ROAS.
It’s a bit of a strange name, but it’s
the name used for this method of inter-VLAN
routing, as there is only a single physical
interface connecting the router and the switch,
and it looks like a ‘stick’ on the network
topology diagram.
So, in this case that one physical interface
being used on R1 to connect to SW2 is G0/0.
It’s connected to G0/1 on SW2.
But, we can actually divide this one physical
interface into three separate subinterfaces,
which will allow us to perform inter-VLAN
routing with only one physical interface.
So, it would look like this.
G0/0.10 for VLAN10, G0/0.20 for VLAN20, and
G0/0.30 for VLAN30.
These three logical subinterfaces are really
one physical interface, G0/0 which is connected
to SW2’s G0/1 interface, but they can operate
like three separate interfaces.
Before we look at the router configurations,
note that we don’t need to do any additional
configurations on SW2.
We already configured G0/1 as a trunk, and
made sure that VLANs 10, 20, and 30 are allowed.
That’s all you need to do on the switch, configure
the interface like a regular trunk.
Now let’s look at the router configurations.
Here are the configurations.
First, make sure the interface is enabled
with ‘no shutdown’, as router interfaces
are disabled by default.
Next up is the first subinterface.
Notice how to enter subinterface configuration
mode.
Interface g0/0 DOT 10.
This subinterface number does not have to
match the VLAN number.
However it is highly recommended that they
do match, to make it easier to understand.
If each subinterface’s number matches the
VLAN number, it’s easy to see which subinterface
is used for each VLAN.
The next command after that is ENCAPSULATION
DOT1Q, followed by the VLAN number, which
is 10 in this case.
This tells the router to treat any arriving
frames tagged with the specified VLAN number
as if they arrived on this sub interface.
If a frame arrives tagged with VLAN10, R1
will behave as if it arrived on interface
G0/0.10.
It will also tag all frames leaving this subinterface
with VLAN10 using dot1q.
Finally, after the encapsulation dot1q command,
simply assign the IP address to the subinterface.
Once again, I have assigned the last usable
address of the subnet.
And that’s all for this subinterface.
Then I did the same thing with the other two
subinterfaces.
Again, I made the subinterface and VLAN numbers
match, and configured the last usable IP address
of each subnet as the IP address of the subinterface.
If you confirm with the SHOW IP INTERFACE
BRIEF command, you can see that each of the
subinterfaces appears, as well as the physical
interface, although the physical interface
itself has no IP address assigned to it.
And here is the routing table.
Notice the connected and local routes are
added just like when IP addresses are added
to regular physical interfaces.
When R1 sends frames out of these subinterfaces,
it adds the VLAN tag configured on the subinterface.
For example, if a packet arrives destined
for the 192.168.1.64/26 subnet, it will send
the packet out of it’s G0/0 interface tagged
with VLAN20.
Okay, let’s review the important points
about router on a stick.
ROAS is used to route between multiple VLANs
using a single interface on the router and
switch.
The switch interface is configured as a regular
trunk.
The router interface is configured using subinterfaces.
You configure the VLAN tag and IP address
on each subinterface.
The router will behave as if frames arriving
with a certain VLAN tag have arrived on the
subinterface configured with that VLAN tag.
Finally, the router will tag frames sent out
of each subinterface with the VLAN tag configured
on the subinterface.
Now that we have configured the router, let’s
return to this diagram to see how interVLAN
routing works with these subinterfaces.
This PC in VLAN10 is trying to reach this
PC in VLAN30.
The frame is sent to SW2.
SW2 sends the frame on its G0/1 interface
to R1, tagging it as being in VLAN10.
R1 receives it on its G0/0 interface, identifying
it as arriving on the G0/0.10 subinterface
because of the VLAN10 tag.
The destination is in the subnet 192.168.1.128/26,
which is connected to R1’s G0/0.30 subinterface,
so it sends the frame out of its G0/0 interface.
It tags it as VLAN30 because that is what
was configured on the G0/0.30 subinterface.
SW2 then forwards it to SW1, tagging it as
VLAN30 over the trunk.
SW1 then forwards the frame to the destination.
Okay, let’s quickly review before moving
on to today’s quiz.
I think I say this after every video these
days, but there was a lot of information in
this video.
Please rewatch certain parts of the video
if you need to, and use the supplementary
materials to help you practice and review
as well.
First off, we answered the question WHAT IS
A TRUNK PORT?
It’s a switch interface that carries traffic
over multiple VLANs.
We also answered what the purpose of a trunk
port is.
It allows switches to forward traffic from
multiple VLANs over a single physical interface,
instead of having to use a separate physical
interface for every single VLAN.
I also introduced 802.1Q encapsulation, which
is a tag inserted into the Ethernet frame
and is used to identify which VLAN the frame
belongs to when sent over a trunk port.
I showed how to configure trunk ports on a
Cisco switch, including the encapsulation
type, allowed VLANs, and native VLAN.
Finally, I showed you how to configure ROUTER
ON A STICK, which involves configuring multiple
subinterfaces on a single physical interface,
which again allows for traffic from multiple
VLANs and subnets to be routed without having
to use a separate physical interface for each
one.
It’s like a trunk port on a router.
Finally, let’s move on to today’s quiz.
First up, question 1.
You want to configure SW1 to send VLAN10 frames
untagged over its GigabitEthernet0/1 interface,
a trunk.
Which command is appropriate?
A, encapsulaton dot1q 10.
B, switchport trunk allowed vlan 10.
C, switchport trunk allowed vlan add 10.
D, switchport trunk native vlan 10.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is D, switchport trunk native VLAN10.
A, encapsulation dot1q 10 is used on a router
subinterface to specify which VLAN it belongs
to.
B and C are used to modify the VLANs allowed
on the trunk.
D is used to specify the native VLAN, and
traffic in the native VLAN is sent untagged
over the trunk.
Next let’s go to question 2.
After modifying the VLANs allowed on a trunk
interface, you want to return it to the default
state.
Which command will do this?
A, switchport trunk allowed vlan default.
B, switchport trunk allowed vlan all.
C, switchport trunk allowed vlan none.
Or D, switchport trunk allowed vlan 1 and
1001 to 1005.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, switchport trunk allowed
VLAN all.
By default all VLANs are allowed on a trunk
port, so switchport trunk allowed vlan all
will return it to the default state.
Answer D, by the way, lists the VLANs that
exist on a Cisco switch by default, but that’s
different than the VLANs allowed on a trunk
by default.
Okat, let's go to question 3.
You try to configure an interface on a Cisco
switch as a trunk port with the command switchport
mode trunk, but the command is rejected.
Which command might fix this issue?
A, switch port mode trunk.
B, switchport trunk encapsulation 802.1q.
C, switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q.
Or D, switchport trunk encapsulation auto.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, switchport trunk encapsulation
dot1q.
On Cisco switches that support both 802.1Q
and ISL encapsulations for trunk ports, if
you want to manually configure the interface
as a trunk you have to manually specify the
encapsulation type with SWITCHPORT TRUNK
ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q.
You could use ISL instead, but ISL is almost
never used.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which field of the 802.1Q tag identifies the
VLAN ID of the frame?
A, TPID.
B, VID.
C, TCI.
Or D, VLN.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, VID.
VID stands for VLAN ID, it is 12 bits long
and identifies the VLAN number.
TPID stands for tag protocol identifier, and
uses a hexadecimal value of 8100 to identify
the frame as 802.1Q-tagged.
PCP stands for priority code point and is
used for class of service, not to tag the
VLAN ID.
D, VLN, is not a real field of the 802.1Q
tag.
Let’s go to the last question, question
5.
You configured switchport trunk allowed vlan
add 10 on an interface, but VLAN10 doesn’t
appear in the Vlans allowed and active in
management domain section of the show interfaces
trunk command output.
What might be the reason?
A, VLAN10 doesn’t exist on the switch.
B, the command is invalid.
C, the command should be switchport trunk
allowed vlan 10. or D, vlan10 is reserved
and cannot be used.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is A, VLAN10 doesn’t exist on
the switch.
If a VLAN doesn’t exist on the switch, even
if it is allowed on the trunk, it won’t
appear in the 'Vlans allowed and active in
management domain' section of the show interfaces
trunk command output.
That’s all for the quiz.
Okay, so as always there will be supplementary
materials for this video.
There will be flash cards to use with the
software ANKI, to help you remember things
learned in this video.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can practice the configurations
learned in this video.
That will be in a separate video.
Before finishing this video, I want to think
all of my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to Charlsetta, Lito, Yonatan, Mike,
Aleksander, Vance, Yousif, Samil, Boson Software,
Sidi, Magrathea, and Devin.
Sorry if I pronounced your names incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
Extra shoutout to Boson software, I absolutely
love their ExSim practice exams and NetSim
network simulator, check out the links in
the video description for their products.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.