Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will continue our study of
spanning tree.
In part 1 we focused on the basic purpose
of spanning tree and how to calculate a spanning
tree topology.
In this video we will look into more detail
at the operation of spanning tree.
First let’s see what we’ll cover in this
video.
First of all we will take a look at spanning tree states and timers.
You already know the blocking and forwarding
states, but there are also a couple transitional
states between those two, and some timers
that determine when the switch moves between
each state.
I’ll show you the spanning tree BPDU (bridge protocol data unit, what fields are included in it
and what their purpose  is.
Then we’ll take a look at some optional
features of STP, sometimes called the spanning
tree ‘toolkit’, some additional features
that you can enable that improve spanning
tree, we’ll cover some of them briefly.
Finally, we’ll cover spanning tree configurations.
Spanning tree runs by default so you don’t
actually have to do any configuration, but
you should know how to change which switch
becomes the root switch and such, so you can
make sure traffic follows the best path.
Also, make sure to stick around to the end
of today’s quiz.
I will feature one practice question from
Boson Software’s ExSim, a fantastic set
of practice exams for the CCNA.
Pretty much everyone who uses them agrees
they are the best practice exams out there,
and are an essential part of preparing for
the CCNA.
They definitely helped me pass all of my CCNA
and CCNP exams on the first try!
If you want to grab a copy of ExSim, please
follow the link in the video description.
First let’s take a look at spanning
tree port states.
You are already familiar with two, BLOCKING
and FORWARDING, but there are two others,
LISTENING and LEARNING.
BLOCKING and FORWARDING are the two ‘stable’
states.
Root and Designated ports remain stable in a Forwarding state, and Non-designated ports remain stable
in a Blocking state.
Note that they only remain stable as long
as there are no changes in the network topology.
If a new device is added, an interface is
shutdown, or a hardware failure occurs somewhere,
they may have to change states.
But as I said, as long as the network is stable,
each spanning tree interface will be stable
in one of these states.
Now, there are also two transitional states.
Listening and Learning are transitional states
which are passed through when an interface
is activated, or when a Blocking port must
transition to a Forwarding state due to a
change in the network topology.
Actually, there is one more state you might
hear of, this is the disabled state.
This simply refers to an interface that is
administratively disabled, meaning shutdown.
We won’t really talk about the disabled
state much because it doesn’t really play
any role in spanning tree, the interface is
shut down.
Okay, let’s take a look at these states,
starting with the Blocking state.
Non-designated ports are in a Blocking state.
Interfaces in a Blocking state are effectively
disabled to prevent loops.
This is what makes spanning tree work, disabling
redundant interfaces to avoid loops.
Interfaces in a Blocking state do not send/receive
regular network traffic.
Any regular traffic that arrives on an interface
in a blocking state will simply be dropped.
However, Interfaces in a Blocking state do
receive STP BPDUs.
They need to receive and process BPDUs to
be aware of the spanning tree topology, and be ready
to transition toward a forwarding state if
they need to.
But, interfaces in a Blocking state do NOT
forward STP BPDUs.
Finally, interfaces in a Blocking state do
NOT learn MAC addresses.
If regular traffic arrives on the interface
it is dropped without adding the MAC address
to the MAC address table.
After the Blocking state, interfaces with
the Designated or Root role enter the Listening
state.
Let me just repeat that only Designated or
Root ports enter the Listening state, Non-designated
ports are always Blocking.
That’s because Listening is a transitional
state that eventually leads to the forwarding
state, so there’s no need for a Non-designated
port to enter this state.
The Listening state is 15 seconds long by
default.
This is determined by a timer called the ‘Forward
delay’ timer.
You’ll soon see that this timer isn’t
used only for the Listening state.
Anyway, remember that it is 15 seconds by
default.
An interface in the Listening state ONLY forwards/receives Spanning Tree BPDUs.
It does NOT send or receive regular traffic.
If a regular unicast frame is received on
a port in the Listening state, it will be
discarded.
An interface in the Listening state also does
NOT learn MAC addresses from regular traffic
that arrives on the interface.
I said the same thing about the Blocking state,
but let me explain.
As you know well already, when a frame arrives
on a switch interface, the switch uses the
source MAC address field to ‘learn’ that
MAC address, and it updates the MAC address
table with the MAC address, interface, and
VLAN information.
However, if an interface is in the spanning
tree Listening state, it will not do this.
The traffic is simply dropped, and the MAC
address learning process does not occur.
After the Listening state, a Designated or
Root port will enter the Learning state.
The Learning state is 15 seconds long by default.
This is determined by the Forward delay timer,
so the same timer is used for both the Listening
and Learning states, meaning by default it
takes a total of 30 seconds to move through
both states and enter a forwarding state.
Same as in the Listening state, an interface
in the Learning state ONLY sends or receives
spanning tree protocol BPDUs.
Also, it does NOT send or receive regular traffic.
However, here is the difference between the
Listening and Learning states.
An interface in the Learning state learns
MAC addresses from regular traffic that arrives
on the interface.
So, an interface in the learning state is
preparing to forward traffic by building up
some of its MAC address table beforehand.
Finally, we have the forwarding state.
Root and Designated ports are in a Forwarding
state when they're stable.
A port in the Forwarding state operate as
normal.
So, what does that mean?
A port in the Forwarding state sends and receives
BPDUs.
It sends and receives normal traffic.
Also it learns MAC addresses from the frames that
arrive on it, and adds them to the MAC address
table.
So, it’s a switchport operating as normal.
For review, here’s a summary of each spanning
tree port state.
For reference, I’ve also added the Disabled
state to the bottom, which as I said before
is the spanning tree state of a shutdown,
administratively disabled, interface.
Pause the video if you want to take a look
at this table and use it for review.
You can also review using the flashcard deck,
make sure to download it from the link in
the video description.
Now let’s talk about each of the timers
used in Spanning Tree.
I’ve already mentioned the Hello and Forward
Delay timers, but I haven’t mentioned Max
Age yet.
First up let’s look more in detail at the
hello timer.
It determines how often the root bridge sends
hello BPDUs, by default it will send them
every 2 seconds.
Other switches in the network do not originate
their own BPDUs, but they will forward BPDUs
they receive.
However, there is one thing I didn’t mention
before.
The switches will only forward BPDUs on their
DESIGNATED PORTs.
Let’s see how that works.
First off, I showed you this slide in day
20’s video.
Assuming these switches all come online at
the same time, each assumes they are the root
bridge, and each will send BPDUs out of all
interfaces.
However, once the network has converged and
all switches and ports are stabilized in their
roles, only the root bridge sends BPDUs.
Then, the other switches will forward these
BPDUs on their designated ports, updating
information like the bridge root cost, sending
bridge ID, sending port ID, etc.
Then, two seconds later, the root bridge will
send BPDUs again, and the other switches will
again forward these BPDUs on their designated
ports.
Note that they do not forward the BPDUs out
of their root ports and non-designated ports,
only their designated ports.
So, that’s the hello timer.
Next up, the forward delay timer.
This is the length of the Listening and Learning
transitional states that a port goes through
when it moves to forwarding.
Note that this is the length of each of the
states, not the total length of both combined.
So, with the default Forward delay timer of
15 seconds, it takes a total of 30 seconds
for the switchport to move through both states
and forward traffic.
Then the final timer, one I haven’t told
you about yet, is the max age timer.
This timer indicates how long an interface
will wait to change the spanning tree topology after
ceasing to receive BPDUs.
So, this will need some more explanation.
Let’s take a look.
Remember that each collision domain has one
designated port, and BPDUs are forwarded out
of designated ports.
So, all root ports and non-designated ports
expect to receive BPDUs.
The root bridge, SW3, sends BPDUs, and then
SW1 and SW4 forward them out of their designated
ports.
To demonstrate the Max Age timer, let’s
focus on SW2’s G0/1 interface.
It just received a BPDU, so the max age timer
is reset to 20.
It counts down to 19...
18…
And then the root bridge sends BPDUs, because
of the 2 second hello timer.
they are forwarded by the other switches,
and SW2 resets its max age timer to 20...
19...18…
But what if a failure occurs on the connection
between SW1 and SW2?
The root bridge will send BPDUs, and other
switches will forward the BPDUs, but SW1’s
G0/0 interface is down so SW2 no longer receives
a BPDU on its G0/1 interface.
So, the max age timer continues counting down.
17…
16…
15… and if the failure doesn’t recover
and SW2 doesn’t receive any more BPDUs on
its G0/1 interface, SW2’s max age timer
will count all the way down to 0.
What happens then?
First of all, If another BPDU is received
before the max age timer counts down to 0,
the time will reset to 20 seconds and no changes
will occur.
However, If another BPDU is not received,
the max age timer counts down to 0 and the
switch will reevaluate its STP choices, including
root bridge, and local root, designated, and
non-designated ports.
After these decisions, if a non-designated
port is selected to become a designated or
root port, it will transition from the blocking
state to the listening state (for 15 seconds),
learning state (again for 15 seconds), and then finally
the forwarding state.
So, it can take a total of 50 seconds for
a blocking interface to transition to forwarding.
Why does it take so long?
Well, tThese timers and transitional states
are to make sure that loops aren’t accidentally
created by an interface moving to forwarding
state too soon.
I showed you in the previous lecture how dangerous
a Layer 2 loop can be.
That’s why spanning tree protocol is very
careful about moving an interface to a forwarding
state.
However, a forwarding interface can move directly
to a blocking state, because there is no worry
about creating a loop by blocking an interface.
But, as I just said, a blocking interface
cannot move directly to forwarding state.
It must go through the listening and learning
states.
So let’s move on to check out the spanning
tree BPDU, bridge protocol data unit.
First off, in the Ethernet header section,
notice the destination.
Cisco’s PVST+ uses the destination MAC address
of 0100.0ccc.cccd for its BPDUs.
I recommend remembering this, it’s a little
bit of trivia you might need to know for the
test.
For remembering little facts like these, I
highly recommend using the Anki flashcard
deck I include with this video.
I mentioned PVST in the previous lecture,
but what’s PVST+?
Well, PVST is an older version which only
supports Cisco’s ISL for trunk encapsulation.
PVST+ is a newer version which supports dot1q.
I might use the term ‘PVST’ sometimes,
but really I mean PVST+, because ISL is pretty
much never used anymore.
By the way, since I mentioned the MAC address,
regular spanning tree, meaning not Cisco’s
PVST or PVST+, uses a destination MAC address
of 0180.c200.0000.
Again, you probably should remember that fact
for the exam.
Now let’s move on to the spanning tree BPDU
itself.
I don’t think you need to memorize the BPDU for the CCNA, but I just want to
give you an introduction to what is included
in the BPDU.
The first three fields are the protocol identifier,
which is always hexadecimal 0000 for spanning
tree.
The protocol version identifier is set to
0 for classic spanning tree, you’ll see
a different value here when we look at rapid
spanning tree protocol in day 22.
Finally, the BPDU type is hexadecimal 00 for
what’s called a ‘configuration BPDU’.
There are other types of BPDUs, but we don’t
need to go that in depth for the CCNA.
Next up are some flags, these are used to
signal topology changes to other switches.
Again, I don’t think we need to go in depth
about these for the CCNA.
Next up is the root identifier, which gives
the bridge priority, extended system ID, which
is the VLAN ID, 10 in this case, and the bridge
system ID, which is the MAC Address of the
root bridge.
I set the MAC address to all A’s in this
case.
Next is the root path cost.
It’s 0 in this case, so you know that this
is the root bridge.
You can also know this is the root bridge
by looking at this field.
The information in the bridge identifier field
is the same as in the root identifier field,
meaning this is the root bridge.
After that is the port identifier, the interface
which sent the BPDU.
It is hexadecimal 8 0 0 2.
8 0 in hexadecimal is equivalent to 128, which
if you remember from day 20, is the default
port priority.
0 2 is the number of the port itself.
Finally, the timers.
Message age is something I haven’t mentioned
yet, but it starts at 0 at the root bridge
and is increased by 1 each time it is forwarded
by another switch.
It is subtracted from the max age when a switch
receives the BPDU, so for example if the BPDU
is passed through 5 switches, when it reaches
the 6th bridge it will immediately reduce
its max age timer to 15, meaning each time
it receives a BPDU its max age will reset
to 15 instead of 20, even though the max age
timer is 20.
I don’t think that’s an important topic
for the CCNA though, its a bit more advanced.
After that we have the three timers we talked
about, max age, hello, and forward delay.
By the way, the spanning tree timers on the
root bridge determine the spanning tree timers
for the rest of the switches in the network,
even if they are configured differently.
Next let’s talk about some optional features
of spanning tree, sometimes called the spanning
tree toolkit.
These are features that can be enabled to
improve the functionality of spanning tree
protocol in some way.
The first one is called portfast.
It solves one problem of spanning tree.
Portfast can be enabled on interfaces which
are connected to end hosts, like the G0/2
interface on each of these switches.
These are designated ports, in a forwarding
state.
However, when they are first turned on or
first connected to the PCs, they must go through
the Listening and Learning states first before
they can start forwarding traffic.
How long does that take?
15 seconds for Listening and 15 seconds for
Learning, so 30 seconds in total.
I want you to open up Packet Tracer and try
a little experiment.
For this experiment, make sure Show Link Lights
is enabled.
You can enable it by clicking on options,
preferences, and then making sure this box
is checked.
I want you to place a switch and a PC like
this, get a watch or timer ready, and then
connect them.
At first you should see that the link light
on the switch is orange.
This is the same if you connect a real physical
PC to a physical switch, the link light will
be orange.
Why is this?
It’s because the port is not Forwarding
yet, it is going through the Listening and
Learning states.
However, 30 seconds later you should finally
see the link light turn green.
The port is finally forwarding.
I told you why spanning tree goes through
this process before putting a port in the
forwarding state, it’s because Layer 2 loops
are so dangerous for a network that the switch
wants to be absolutely sure no loop will be
formed before forwarding out of that interface.
However, only interfaces connected to another
switch can form a Layer 2 loop.
There is no risk of forming a loop with an
end host.
So, wouldn’t it be nice if these ports connected
to end hosts could start forwarding right
away, without having to wait 30 seconds to
go from listening to learning to forwarding?
Well, that’s what portfast does.
Portfast allows a port to move immediately
to the Forwarding state, bypassing Listening
and Learning.
If used, it must be enabled only on ports
connected to end hosts.
If enabled on a port connected to another
switch it could cause a Layer 2 loop.
The purpose of the listening and learning
states is to avoid causing a loop, so bypassing
them is risky when connected to another switch.
We haven’t looked at any other spanning
tree configurations yet because spanning tree
operates by default even without configuration.
We will look at general spanning tree configuration,
but first lets look at portfast.
Portfast is enabled at the interface level
with the command SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
Then we get a warning about what I just told
you, you should only enable portfast on ports
connected to an end host.
There is also a message saying that, even
though portfast was configured, it will only
take effect if the interface is in a non-trunking
mode, so if it is an access port.
That’s because trunk ports are typically
connected to other switches.
You can still configure portfast on a trunk
port, it just won’t take effect.
You can also enable portfast with the following
command in global config mode: spanning-tree
portfast default.
This enables portfast on all access ports,
but not trunk ports.
So, portfast is a great feature for getting
a switchport connected to an end host running
quickly without having to wait 30 seconds.
However, it can still be a risk.
What if an employee plugs another switch into
the network like this?
This employee doesn’t necessarily have malicious
intent, they could just be unaware of exactly
what they are doing.
Because portfast is putting these interfaces
into a forwarding state, a Layer 2 loop is
formed.
Portfast can also cause loops if the network
cabling is changed without proper caution,
perhaps a host is moved to a different switchport
and a switch is connected to its old port.
Anyway, the point is that there is a risk
to using portfast.
However, there is an additional spanning tree
optional feature that we can enable to protect
against such loops.
It’s called BPDU Guard.
If an interface with BPDU Guard enabled receives
a BPDU from another switch, the interface
will be shut down to prevent a loop from forming.
BPDU guard is very simple to configure.
From interface configuration mode, use the
command SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE.
That’s it.
Similar to portfast, there is also an option
to enable it by default.
That’s this command.
From global config mode, use the command SPANNING-TREE
PORTFAST BPDUGUARD DEFAULT.
This enables BPDU Guard on all portfast-enabled
interfaces.
Notice that the commands are a little different,
to enable it directly on the interface its
spanning-tree bpduguard enable, no mention
of portfast.
However to enable it globally, you have to
include portfast in the command, spanning-tree
portfast bpduguard default.
I took this screenshot in packet tracer, so
the CLI color scheme is a little different
than the previous one, but I connected a switch
to a BPDU-guard enabled interace, and now
you can see what happens when a BPDU arrives
on a BPDU guard-enabled port.
The port is disabled, it is effectively shut
down.
What if you want to enable the port again?
To enable a port that was disabled by BPDU
guard, simply SHUTDOWN, and then NO SHUTDOWN
the interface.
You can see that the interface comes up.
However, if you didn’t actually solve the
problem and it's still connected to a switch,
you can see here that the interface will immediately
be disabled again when the next BPDU arrives.
So, make sure you actually solve the problem
before trying to enable the interface again.
In terms of spanning tree optional features,
the 200-301 exam topics list only mentions
portfast.
I also showed you BPDU guard because it is
connected to portfast, so I think it is included.
There are many other optional features that
can be enabled, and there’s no need to know
all of them for the CCNA, but let me just
quickly introduce two others you should at
least know the name and basic purpose of,
just incase they are mentioned in the exam.
They are Root Guard and Loop Guard.
If you enable root guard on an interface,
even if it receives a superior BPDU (with a lower
bridge ID) on that interface, the switch will
not accept the new switch as the root bridge.
The interface will be disabled.
This helps maintain the spanning tree topology
if someone plugs another switch into the network
either with bad intent, or perhaps without
knowing the impact of their action.
If you enable loop guard on an interface,
even if the interface stops receiving BPDUs,
it will not start forwarding.
The interface will be disabled.
This prevents loops that can happen if an
interface fails only in one direction, causing
what is called a ‘unidirectional link’
that can’t receive data, but is still able
to forward it, or the opposite.
So, those are two other optional spanning
tree features.
However, as I said, You probably don’t have
to know these spanning tree optional features (or others
such as UplinkFast, Backbone Fast, etc) for
the CCNA.
But make sure you know Portfast and BPDU Guard.
If you want to read more about the others
just in case, do a Google search.
Finally, let’s look at some basic spanning
tree configurations, starting with the mode.
You can configure the spanning mode the switch
uses with the command SPANNING-TREE MODE,
and then you can see there are three options.
MST, multiple spanning tree, is not a topic
you need to know for the CCNA.
PVST is the classic spanning tree but with
Cisco’s per-vlan addition, the one we have
been learning about so far.
Rapid-PVST is an improved version I will tell
you about in the next lecture.
Modern Cisco switches run rapid-PVST by default,
and usually there is no reason to change it.
However, if you want to try out the classic
spanning tree for your lab, like I did for
these demonstrations, you can enable it with
this command, SPANNING-TREE MODE PVST.
You can also manually configure the root bridge
by manipulating the bridge priority of a switch.
With these MAC addresses and the default priority
values, SW1 is the root bridge.
However, we could configure SW3 to be the
root bridge.
We could also configure something called a
‘secondary’ root bridge, which will be
next in line to become the root bridge if
the current root bridge fails.
Let’s see how to configure that.
This is how to configure the root bridge,
called the ‘primary’ root bridge.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN, followed by the vlan number,
then ROOT PRIMARY.
Now you can see that this bridge has become the
root.
This command sets the STP priority to 24576.
If another switch already has a priority lower
than 24576, it sets this switch’s priority
to 4096 less than the other switch’s priority.
So, it makes this switch have the lowest priority,
making it the root bridge.
If you then check the running-config, you
can see that the command that is actually
applied in this case is SPANNING-TREE VLAN
1 PRIORITY 24576.
So, this commands tells the switch to apply
the spanning-tree priority command, either
with the priority 24576, or 4096 less than
the current lowest priority.
The command to set the secondary root bridge,
the bridge with the second-lowest priority,
is basically the same.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN, vlan number, ROOT SECONDARY.
Now the priority has been set to 28672.
So, this command sets the spanning tree priority
for this VLAN to 28672.
However, like the root primary command, the
actual command that is applied is the spanning-tree
priority command.
So, for both of these commands, you could
actually use the spanning-tree priority command
as you see here to configure the root bridge,
the spanning-tree root command is just a simple
way to do it without remembering the different
increments of 4096.
You may remember from the last lecture, that
the bridge priority must be set in increments
of 4096, so the root command is easier to
use.
So, this is our topology now.
The interface between SW1 and SW2 is disabled
because SW1 is blocking its G0/0 interface.
This topology is running Cisco’s PVST+,
so actually this is just the topology for
VLAN1.
Perhaps there is another VLAN, VLAN 2, in
this topology, what will the topology look
like for it?
It will look like this, the default topology,
because the root bridge settings we configured
only apply to VLAN 1.
In VLAN 2, the connection between SW1 and
SW2 WON’T be disabled, instead the connection
between SW2 and SW3 will be disabled.
This allows for what’s called spanning tree
load balancing.
If you have multiple VLANs in your network,
blocking the same interface in each VLAN is
a waste of interface bandwidth.
That connection will be doing nothing, just
waiting for another connection to fail so
it can start forwarding.
However, if you configure a different root
bridge for different VLANs, different VLANs
will disable different interfaces.
Okay, to check if you understood that explanation,
let’s do a quick quiz.
This is quiz question 7, because in day 20’s
lecture we did spanning tree quizzes 1 to
6.
Two VLANs are active in this network, 10 and
20.
By default, SW3 is the root bridge for both
VLANs.
Configure SW1 as the primary root for VLAN10
and the secondary root for VLAN20.
Configure SW2 as the primary root for VLAN20
and the secondary root for VLAN10.
Which two commands should you issue on SW1,
and which two commands should you issue on
SW2?
So, use the commands I just showed you, the
spanning-tree root commands, and configure
SW1 and SW2.
You don’t have access to the CLI so just
use an empty text file to write out the commands,
two commands on each switch.
Pause the video now to do so.
Okay, let’s check.
We want to make SW1 the primary root bridge
for VLAN10 and the secondary for VLAN20, so
essentially it acts like a backup root bridge
for VLAN20.
So, these are the commands to issue on SW1.
On SW2 we want to do the opposite.
It should be the root bridge for VLAN20, and
be just the secondary root bridge for VLAN10,
so it will have the second lowest priority
in VLAN10 and become the root for VLAN10 if
SW1 fails.
These are the commands to issue on SW2, basically
the opposite of SW1.
So, did you get the correct answers?
If not, don’t worry.
Please watch the next video which will be
a lab video covering the configurations you
learn in this video, you can practice with
that lab.  Or of course feel free to make your
own labs in packet tracer to practice.
So, with those settings, perhaps the VLAN10 topology
looks like this.
And then perhaps the VLAN20 topology looks like this.
So, different connections are used in different
VLANs, the load is balanced across different
interfaces, this is called load balancing.
Before moving on to the rest of the quiz questions
for today and finishing up, let me quickly
show you how to configure some spanning-tree
port settings.
There are two main settings you can configure
on a spanning tree port.
The cost, and the port priority, and as you
can see from this command they are both configured
on a per-VLAN basis like the bridge priority.
As a review, what is cost?
It’s the root cost, remember the chart I
showed you in day 20.
FastEthernet costs 19, gigabit ethernet costs
4, etc.
It’s used primarily to determine the root
port, and is also used as a tiebreaker in
selecting designated and non-designated ports.
How about the priority, do you remember what
it is used for?
Well, it is the first half of the port ID,
which is the final tiebreaker in determining
the root port.
Why would you want to change either of these
values?
Well, to change the result of the root port
or designated port selection process.
I won’t give a detailed example here, but
we’ll practice it a little bit in the lab
video, so make sure to watch that.
First I configured the cost of this interface,
as you can see the range is from 1 to 200
million.
Then I set the port-priority, which is configured
in increments of 32, from 0 to 224.
Those are the only spanning tree interface
settings you need to know for the CCNA.
Again, stay tuned for the lab video to try
them out.
So, what did we cover?
We covered the different spanning tree states
and timers used.
We took a brief look at the structure of a
spanning tree BPDU, we looked at a few of
the spanning-tree optional features, focusing
on portfast and BPDU guard.
Finally we did some basic spanning tree configurations,
including configuring the root bridge, using
different root bridges in different VLANs
to achieve load balancing across different
interfaces, and then some basic spanning tree
interface settings.
Okay, for today’s quiz we’ll do 3 more
questions about spanning tree, covering what
we learned in this video.
After that, one special practice question
from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA, by
far the best practice exams for the CCNA there
are so be sure to watch for that.
If you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
Now let’s go to question 8 of the quiz.
So, continuing from quiz question 7 we did
earlier, here is number 8.
You connect a PC to a switch, however for
about half a minute you are unable to connect
to the network.
Which two options could fix this issue and
allow you to access the network more quickly?
Choose two.
Each answer is a complete solution.
A, enable portfast on the switch port you
connect the PC to.
B, reduce the STP hello timer.
C, reduce the STP forward delay timer.
Or D, reduce the STP max age timer.
Pause the video to think about your answer,
remember to choose two.
The answers are A and C. A, portfast, allows
switchports to bypass the listening and learning
spanning tree states and enter the forwarding
state immediately, so there will be no delay
after connecting the PC.
As for C, the forward delay timer determines
how long the listening and learning states
are.
If you shorten this timer, the switch will
begin forwarding more quickly.
However, it is recommended that you leave
the timers at their default settings, these
default settings were chosen for a reason.
Okay let’s go to question 9.
A packet capture indicates that a switch port
has an STP port ID of 0x8002.
What is the STP port priority of this port?
A, 80.
B, 32.
C, 128.
Or D, 224.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, 128.
The first half of the port ID, hexadecimal
8 0, is the STP port priority.
Hexadecimal 8 0 is equivalent to 128 in decimal,
so C is the correct answer.
Let’s go to question 10.
You want to make sure that a Layer 2 loop
will not be caused if a user connects a switch
to a switch port.
Which spanning tree optional feature achieves
this?
A, portfast.
B, loop guard.
C, root guard.
Or D, BPDU guard.
Pause the video to think about your anwer.
The answer is D, BPDU guard.
BPDU guard will shutdown an interface if a
BPDU is received on the interface, to prevent
any potential loops.
It should be enabled on portfast-enabled switch
ports connected to end hosts.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz, let’s take
a look at a question from Boson ExSim for
CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson ExSim practice question
we're going to take a look at the same question
as in Day 20's video because at the end of
Day 20's video I said we hadn't actually learned
enough to answer the questions from Boson
ExSim about spanning tree.
Well, now we can answer at least some of them.
So, let's read the question one more time.
You want to decrease the amount of time that
it takes for switch ports on SwitchA to begin
forwarding.
PortFast is not configured on any of the switch
ports on SwitchA.
You issue the SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST DEFAULT
command from global configuration mode.
Which of the ports on SwitchA will use PortFast?
Select the best answer.
A, no ports because PortFast cannot be enabled
globally.
B, all trunk ports.
C, all ports.
Or D, all access ports.
Okay, you should know the answer to this question.
Please pause the video here to think about
your answer.
Okay, did you get the answer?
So, you should know, we just talked about
it, the answer is D, all access ports.
Or at least I think it is, let's check.
To check your answer click down here, 'show
answer'.
There it is.
Okay, so not only does it tell you it's correct,
but even more importantly it gives you an
explanation of why it's correct.
Why D is correct, and why A, B, and C are
incorrect.
That's one of the great things about Boson
ExSim, is these explanations.
Personally I think a practice exam that just
tells you correct or incorrect, without telling
you why it's correct or why it's incorrect,
isn't very useful.
So let's read just at least this first part
about the explanation.
All access ports on SwitchA will use PortFast.
PortFast enables faster connectivity for hosts
connected to an access layer switch port.
If PortFast is not enabled, a switch port
transitions through the STP listening and
learning states before it enters the forwarding
state.
This process can take as long as 30 seconds
if the default STP timers are used.
In addition, port initialization can take
as long as 50 seconds if Port Aggregation
Protocol is enabled.
I haven't talked about this yet in the course,
that will be coming in Day 23, maybe.
We'll see.
PortFast transitions the port into the STP
forwarding state without going through the
STP listening and learning states.
Okay, and there's more explanation down here.
Plus references, here to the official cert
guide written by Wendell Odom, I highly recommend
it.
And some Cisco documentation you can read
for free online.
Okay, so if you want to get a copy of Boson
ExSim, I highly recommend these practice exams,
I used them myself for my CCNA and CCNP, please
follow the link in the video description.
There will be supplementary materials for
this video.
There will be a review flashcard deck to use
with the software ‘Anki’.
Download the deck from the link in the description.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab.
Please be sure to watch the practice lab and
try it yourself, it will give some more
practice with the configurations you learned
in this video.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to Vikram, Joyce, Marek, Samil,
Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Aleksa,
Miguel, Yousif, Kone, Boson Software, the
creators of ExSim, Sidi, Magrathea, Devin,
Charlsetta, Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksandr,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, May 17th
2020, so if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll definitely
be in the next video.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.