Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to download this practice lab
from the link in the description and try it
out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
Watch until the end of this video, we’ll
take a look at a lab from NetSim.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we will do some basic STP configurations.
STP runs by default, so you don’t actually
have to configure it, however if you just
leave it at the default settings there is
no guarantee that traffic will be following
the optimal path.
So, it’s a good idea to explicitly configure
which switch should be the root for each VLAN,
and also set different roots for different
VLANs so each VLAN uses different links, balancing
the load of the network traffic.
Step 1 in this video is to use the CLI to
check the current STP topology, identify the
root bridge, and the STP role and state of
each port on each switch.
I’ll start on SW1.
First let’s get into privileged exec mode.
ENABLE.
We only need one show command for this.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Information is displayed separately for VLAN1
and VLAN2, however because I haven’t done
any configuration yet their settings will
be the same, the same root bridge and the
role of each port will be the same also, so let’s
just look at VLAN1.
SW1 is not the root bridge, notice the MAC
address is different in the Root ID section
and the Bridge ID section.
As for the port roles, you can see them here.
F0/3 is the root port, so I’m guessing SW2
is the root bridge.
Let’s go on SW2 now to check if that is
the case.
First enter privileged exec mode.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
In the root ID section, it clearly states
‘this bridge is the root’.
You can also see that all of its interfaces
are designated ports, in a forwarding state.
This is the case for both VLAN1 and VLAN2.
Without any specific configuration, each VLAN
will have the same root, and the port roles
will be the same in each VLAN.
Next let’s go on SW3.
We know its not the root, but which port do
you think is the root port?
It should be F0/2, because it’s directly
connected, and all of these connections are
fastethernet, there are no gigabit ethernet
connections which have a lower cost.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Indeed, F0/2 is the root port, and F0/1 is
designated.
Finally, let’s check SW4.
Its F0/1 interface should be the root port.
ENABLE.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
As expected, F0/1 is the root port, also F0/2
is blocking.
The role says ‘alternate’, this means
a non-designated port.
Step 2 is to configure load balancing by making
SW1 the primary root for VLAN1 and secondary
root for VLAN2, and the opposite on SW2.
Let’s return to SW1.
Go to global config mode, CONF T. Let’s
configure it as the root for VLAN1.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1 ROOT PRIMARY.
Remember to include the VLAN in the command,
in Cisco’s PVST+ all configurations are
done on a per-VLAN basis.
Next, the secondary root for VLAN2.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 2 ROOT SECONDARY.
Now I’ll hop on to SW2.  CONF T. SPANNING-TREE
VLAN 1 ROOT SECONDARY.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 2 ROOT PRIMARY.
Okay, that’s it.
So, what is the STP role and state of each
port now?
Well, here on SW2, in VLAN2 all ports should
be designated, but now on SW1 F0/3 should
be the root port, because it’s directly
connected to the new root SW1.
Let’s check.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
So, for VLAN2 it is still the root, but for
VLAN1 F0/3 is now the root port, as expected.
The other ports are designated ports in a
forwarding state.
Let’s go back and check on SW1.
In VLAN1 all ports should be designated, but
in VLAN2 F0/3 should still be the root port,
like before.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
So, indeed in VLAN2 F0/3 is the root port,
F0/1 and F0/2 are designated.
In VLAN1 however SW1 is now the root bridge,
so all ports are designated.
In step 3 and step 4 we are going to manipulate
a couple STP port settings and see the effects.
First up, we will increase the cost of SW4’s
F0/2 interface to 100 in VLAN1, and see if
it selects a different root port.
First, let’s confirm that the current root
port is F0/2, it should be for VLAN 1.
Let’s view the spanning tree for VLAN1 only.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1.
Okay, as expected F0/2 is the root port, it
has the lowest cost to SW1, the root.
Let’s change that cost.
Before doing so, what do you think will happen?
What is the first criteria in selecting the
root port?
It’s the cost, so increasing the cost to
over 5 times the current cost should cause
SW4 to select a different root port.
Let’s try.
The configuration is done from interface config
mode, so INTERFACE F0/2.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1 COST 100.
Now let’s view the spanning-tree just for
VLAN 1 again.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1.
Okay, as expected F0/2 is no longer the root
port, it has changed to a blocking state,
and now F0/1 is the root port.
For step 4 we will increase the priority
of SW1’s F0/1 to 240, the highest possible
priority number, however in STP a lower number
is actually treated with higher priority,
so really we are lowering the priority to
240, even though the number itself is greater.
Will this effect SW3’s selection of a root
port?
First up, let’s check SW3’s root port
for VLAN1, it should be F0/1.
Let’s just view VLAN1.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1.
Indeed, F0/1 is the root port.
Now, if we set the priority of SW1’s F0/1
port to 240, will this affect SW3’s root
port selection?
What do you think?
Actually, it shouldn’t.
Sender port ID is actually the last tiebreaker,
after port cost and sender bridge ID.
Because F0/1 has a lower root cost than F0/2,
19 versus 38, the port priority should have
no effect.
Let’s go configure that port priority on
SW1.
Enter interface config mode, INTERFACE F0/1.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1 PORT-PRIORITY 240.
First up let’s view that priority here on
SW1.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 1.
Here for interface F0/1 you can see the priority
dot number column, this is the port ID, and
the priority has increased to 240.
Now let’s check on SW3.
Use the up arrow to return to the previous
command and hit enter.
As expected, there is no change, F0/1 is still
the root port.
Finally, let’s configure PortFast and BPDU
Guard.
Before doing so, let’s test portfast.
I will turn on link lights for this, click
options, preferences, and then show link lights
here.
Next, let me delete the connection between
SW3 and PC1.
Now I will connect them again, PC1 to SW3’s
F0/3 interface.
After reconnecting the two devices, SW3’s
F0/3 interface has to go through the STP listening
and learning states before it can forward
traffic again, so the link light will remain
orange for about 30 seconds.
Let’s go on the CLI and configure both
portfast and BPDU guard on F0/3.
INTERFACE F0/3.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE.
Okay, that’s it, pretty simple configurations.
Now that portfast is enabled, I will delete
that connection once more, and now let’s
reconnect them again, PC1 to SW3’s F0/3.
Notice that it moves immediately to forwarding,
the link light is green right away.
Now, because BPDU guard is enabled, if we
connect F0/3 to another switch and a BPDU
is received, the interface should be shut
down.
Let’s try that.
I’ll delete the connection once more, and
this time let’s use a crossover cable to
connect F0/3 to SW4.
When SW3 receives a BPDU from SW4 on its F0/3
interface, the interface is shutdown to avoid
a loop, and now the link light is red.
Let’s delete that connection again, and
use a regular straight through cable to connect
to PC1.
Now let’s return to the CLI, and to enable
this interface that was disabled by BPDU guard,
I will SHUTDOWN, and then NO SHUTDOWN the
interface.
Okay, now F0/3 is back up and running.
Okay, since we finished our experiment I’ll
just configure the same on SW4.
INTERFACE F0/3.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE.
Okay, that’s all for this lab.
Next up let’s take a look at a lab in Boson
NetSim.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim lab preview,
we are once again doing a lab from NetSim
for ENCOR.
This is a CCNP-level lab.
The reason for that is spanning tree configuration
isn't actually in the CCNA exam topics list,
so it's not included in Boson NetSim for CCNA.
However I want to show you a lab anyway, so
let's do a CCNP-level lab.
The one we're going to look at is Spanning
Tree Protocol PVST Load Balancing.
So you click on the lab here, and then click
on 'load lab'.
But I've already done that.
So this is the lab.
Create a VTP management domain for distribution
of VLANs to all switches, and configure a
primary and secondary root bridge for the
VLANs in the network.
So this is definitely a CCNP-level lab.
It's quite challenging, quite extensive, and
it's not just about configuration, but Boson
asks you a lot of really good questions to
test your understanding of spanning tree protocol.
And I think I've said it before, but that's
something I really like about NetSim.
It's not all about the configuration, it really
does test your understanding and help get
you...help you get ready for the exam.
So these are commands you need to know.
Although this is a CCNP-level exam (*lab),
these are actually all commands you already
know.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE, SHOW VLAN, SPANNING-TREE
VLAN ROOT, SPANNING-TREE VLAN PRIORITY, SWITCHPORT
MODE, ENCAPSULATION DOT1Q.
So these are all commands you already know.
So although this lab might be a challenge,
I think it actually is doable for someone
studying for their CCNA.
So, I'm not actually gonna do the configurations
in this demonstration, I just want to walk
through the lab and see what kind of tasks
you're asked to do.
Task 1 is perform the initial configurations.
So these aren't actually spanning-tree configurations.
These are trunk configurations, VTP configurations,
and VLAN configurations.
So that's something I really like about this
lab, it's not focused entirely on spanning
tree.
It helps you review other topics you've studied.
Okay, plan primary and secondary root bridge
configuration.
So in task 2 you're not actually doing any
configuration, you're examining the network,
answering some questions, thinking about what
configurations you're going to do, before
you actually implement and verify the configurations
in task 3.
So what kind of questions are you asked?
For example number 1, how is the information
provided by the network engineer useful?
So that is in this explanation here.
Your network engineer has determined that
VLANs 1 though 3 represent half of the traffic
and VLANs 4 through 6 represent the other
half, so how is this information useful to
you?
And if you don't know how to answer one of
these questions, if you look at the lab solutions
you can find Boson's explanation.
Here is task 2.
So these are Boson's answers to those questions.
Okay, task 3 is actually implement and verify
the configurations.
So, configure the primary and secondary root
bridge for different VLANs to ensure load
balancing.
And task 4, this is something you're not gonna
find on most practice labs, certainly not
my practice labs.
'Document the network'.
Look at these questions, how many root ports
can each non-root bridge have per STP instance?
How many designated ports can a non-root switch
have?
And then here, this one I really like.
Start to document the network.
So, you're going to have to use SHOW commands
to find the bridge ID, root bridge ID, root
port, and path cost to root of each of these
switches.
And then here, use the network diagrams below
to document the root bridge, root ports, designated
ports, alternate ports, and blocked ports.
And then question 5, what path will a VLAN
1 packet take from ASW1 to R2 via CSW2?
So again, these are just really good questions
to really test your understanding of spanning
tree protocol.
And if you ever have problems answering these
questions, once again just look at the lab
solutions and you can find Boson's explanations
here.
For example, these are all the blocking ports
and such in these network topologies here,
from question 4.
Okay, so if you want to get a copy of NetSim,
and I highly recommend you do, as you can
see these are really great, in-depth practice
labs that not only test your knowledge of
the show commands, the configuration commands,
but your knowledge of the topics as a whole.
So if you want to get a copy, please follow
the link in the video description.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.