Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will continue our study of
spanning tree, focusing instead on an updated
version called rapid spanning tree.
More specifically, we’ll be looking at Cisco’s
version, rapid per-VLAN spanning tree.
You saw in the previous lecture that classic
spanning tree can be quite slow, taking up
to 50 seconds for the network to converge
after a change in the topology.
As the name implies, rapid spanning tree improves
this time, only taking a few seconds to respond
to changes in the network.
Because rapid spanning tree is superior to
classic spanning tree, it is the default on
most devices now, and the CCNA exam topics
only mention rapid spanning tree.
However I think it is important to understand
classic spanning tree, and now that you know
about classic spanning tree, rapid spanning
tree will be much easier to learn.
Let’s take a look at what we’ll cover
in this video.
First up, let’s take a few minutes to compare
different versions of STP.
In the past few videos I’ve mentioned multiple
versions, STP, PVST+, rapid STP, rapid PVST+,
multiple spanning tree.
Just so there is no confusion, I will summarize
each version, and clarify between the industry
standards and the Cisco proprietary versions.
Then the rest of the video will be all about
rapid spanning tree, specifically the version
which operates on Cisco switches, rapid per-VLAN
spanning tree plus.
Also, make sure to watch until the end of
today’s quiz, I will once again feature
a bonus question from Boson Software’s ExSim
for the CCNA, a set of practice exams for
the CCNA which I highly recommend.
Ask anywhere on the Internet for CCNA practice
exam recommendations, and people are going
to recommend Boson.
If you want to get a copy of ExSim to prepare
for the exam, follow the link in the video
description.
Let’s start by summarizing the different
versions of spanning tree.
On the left I will list the industry standard
versions, the IEEE standards.
On the right I will list the Cisco proprietary
versions, Cisco’s upgrades to some of the
standard versions.
First up, the classic spanning tree protocol,
IEEE standard 802.1D.
This is the original spanning tree protocol,
according to Wikipedia it was originally published
in 1990, although the original spanning tree
was actually created in 1985, before being
standardized.
In classic STP, all VLANs share one STP instance.
Therefore, we cannot load balance using classic
STP, because there is only one instance, we
cannot block different ports in each VLAN
to achieve load balancing.
So, Cisco decided to improve upon this.
They developed Per-VLAN Spanning Tree Plus.
Actually, before that they developed regular
Per-VLAN Spanning Tree, which as I mentioned
before only supported ISL trunk encapsulation,
no dot1q, but let’s forget about that version
since everyone uses dot1q for their trunk
encapsulation these days.
It’s Cisco’s upgrade to 802.1D. Each VLAN
has its own STP instance.
In the previous lab video when we configured
STP we had to include the VLAN number in each
command, for example spanning-tree vlan 1
root primary.
That’s because a separate STP instance is
running for each VLAN.
Why is this good?
Well, as you know already, we can load balance
by blocking different ports in each VLAN,
in each STP instance.
We can use our network bandwidth more effectively,
since we don’t have any connections going
totally unused, just waiting for another connection
to fail.
Now, as you also know, classic spanning tree
and PVST+ are quite slow.
The max age timer is 20 seconds, and the listening
and learning states are 15 seconds each, so
it can take up to 50 seconds to respond to
changes in the network.
That’s simply not fast enough for modern
networks.
This was solved in rapid spanning tree protocol,
IEEE standard 802.1w.
It is much faster at converging and adapting
to network changes than 802.1D. However, just
like 802.1D, the industry standard rapid spanning
tree protocol runs only one STP instance,
shared by all VLANs.
Therefore, it also cannot load balance.
Cisco once again developed an improved version
of the industry standard, Rapid Per-VLAN Spanning
Tree Plus, or Rapid PVST+.
It is Cisco’s upgrade to 802.1w, featuring
the improved speed of rapid STP, plus it runs
a separate STP instance for each VLAN.
Therefore, it can load balance by blocking
different ports in each VLAN, just like the
previous PVST+.
The final version is Multiple Spanning Tree
Protocol, IEEE standard 802.1s.
It uses modified RSTP mechanics.
But the main improvement is that it can group
multiple VLANs into different instances, for
example if there are 10 VLANs, VLANs 1 to
5 in instance 1, and VLANs 6 to 10 in instance
2, to perform load balancing.
Finally an industry standard version of STP
that allows load balancing, and actually its
superior to Cisco’s rapid-PVST.
If you have many VLANs, let’s say 200, in
your network, configuring primary and secondary
root bridges in each VLAN is a lot of work.
However, with MSTP, all you have to do is
assign VLANs 1 to 100 to instance 1, and VLANs
101 to 200 to instance 2, and then configure
the primary and secondary root bridges for
instance 1 and instance 2, so its much easier
to configure and manage.
Actually, Cisco hasn’t developed their own
version of MSTP, Cisco devices simply run
the industry standard 802.1s.
For large networks, it’s best to use MSTP,
however for small to medium networks without
a huge number of VLANs, Cisco’s Rapid PVST+
is what you’ll probably run on your switches,
and that’s the version we’ll be focusing
on today.
It’s also the version that is mentioned
in the official exam topics list.
Also, all of this information here applies
to the standard 802.1w, but that’s not the
version that runs on Cisco switches.
The good news is, since you already understand
classic STP and PVST+, it will be much easier
to learn rapid STP and rapid PVST+ by comparing
it to the previous versions.
Let’s get started.
Before getting in to the details, here is
Cisco’s summary of RSTP.
RSTP is not a timer-based spanning tree algorithm
like 802.1D. Therefore, RSTP offers an improvement
over the 30 seconds or more that 802.1D takes
to move a link to forwarding.
The heart of the protocol is a new bridge-bridge
handshake mechanism, which allows ports to
move directly to forwarding.
So, that’s the big difference between RSTP
and 802.1D STP. 802.1D uses long timers to
determine when it’s safe to move to the
next state, and these timers are quite long,
to ensure that no loops are accidentally created
when a port starts forwarding.
Back when the original STP was created, it
was acceptable that a port could take 30 to
50 seconds to react to a change and start
forwarding traffic.
However that’s no longer the case.
So, RSTP uses a ‘handshake’ mechanism,
which allows switches to actively negotiate
with other switches and move ports immediately
to the forwarding state if appropriate.
Okay, now I will introduce some of the specifics
of RSTP.
By the way, I will probably say RSTP sometimes,
and Rapid PVST+ other times.
Really, I’m talking about the same thing.
Cisco’s Rapid PVST+ operates the same as
RSTP, but with the addition of a separate
instance for each VLAN, so I will use the
two terms interchangeably.
Let’s summarize some similarities between
STP and RSTP.
First of all, RSTP serves the same purpose
as STP, blocking specific ports to prevent
Layer 2 loops.
RSTP elects a root bridge with the same rules
as STP.
I’m sure you know it by now, the switch
with the lowest bridge ID becomes the root
bridge.
RSTP also elects root ports with the same
rules as STP.
So, the interface with the lowest root cost
becomes the root port, with the same tie-breakers,
neighbor bridge ID and then neighbor port
ID.
You studied this in day 20’s video, our
first video on STP.
Finally, RSTP elects designated ports with
the same rules as STP.
So, the interface on the switch with the lowest
root cost will become designated and the interface
on the other switch will be non-designated.
If there is a tie, the switch with the lowest
bridge ID will set its interface to designated.
Cisco has said that RSTP isn’t a ‘revolution’
of STP, just an ‘evolution’.
It made some major improvements to speed up
STP, but it didn’t change it completely,
as you can see here.
Now let’s look at some of the differences
of STP and RSTP.
First up, port costs were updated for rapid
spanning tree.
Classic spanning tree defines port speeds
up to 10 Gbps, and I believe port speeds faster
than this are all given a cost of 1.
To accommodate for faster speeds, RSTP’s
cost values were expanded.
2 million for 10 mbps, 2 hundred thousand
for 100 mbps, 20 thousand for 1 gbps, 2000
for 10 gbps, 200 for 100 gbps, and 20 for
1 Tbps.
Beyond this, a 10 terabit-per-second interface
would have a cost of 2.
Use the flashcards to remember the port costs
of both classic STP and rapid STP.
Here’s a slide from day 21, the different
port states of classic spanning tree protocol.
Hopefully you remember these states, which
ones send and receive BPDUs, which one forwards
traffic, which ones learn MAC addresses, etc.
However, rapid spanning tree simplifies the
port states, reducing them to just 3, by combining
three of these states into one.
The three states that are combined into one
are blocking, listening, and disabled.
Actually, a more accurate way is to say the
blocking and disabled port states were combined
into one, and the listening state is simply
not used.
So, the listening state is gone, and the blocking
and disabled states have become the discarding
state.
If a port is administratively disabled, meaning
it has the shutdown command applied to it,
it will be in a discarding state in RSTP.
This was previously the disabled state.
If a port is enabled but blocking traffic
to prevent Layer 2 loops, it is also in a
discarding state.
This was previously the blocking state.
Next, how about port roles?
Remember, the three original port roles are
root, designated, and non-designated.
The root port role remains unchanged in RSTP.
The port that is closest to the root bridge
becomes the root port for the switch.
Of course, ‘closest’ means the port with
the lowest root cost.
Also, the root bridge is the only switch that
doesn’t have a root port.
So, these points are the same as what you
already learned about classic spanning tree.
The designated port role also remains unchanged
in RSTP.
The port on a segment (which is another name
for a collision domain) that sends the best
BPDU is that segment’s designated port,
and there can only be one designated port
per segment.
The other port on the segment is either a
root port, or a non-designated port in classic
spanning tree.
However, the non-designated port role was
divided into two separate roles in RSTP.
Those are the alternate port role and the
backup port role.
Let’s break down those two roles.
First up, the alternate port role.
The RSTP alternate port role is a discarding
port that receives a superior BPDU from another
switch.
This is the same as what you’ve already learned
about blocking ports in classic STP.
In our little topology down here, SW1 is the
root bridge.
When BPDUs are sent in this topology, SW3
receives a superior BPDU from SW2.
It’s superior because the bridge ID of SW2
is lower than SW3.
So, SW2’s interface is designated, and SW3’s
is an alternate port.
An alternate port basically functions as a
backup to the root port.
If the root port fails, the switch can immediately
move its best alternate port to forwarding,
as the new root port.
If SW3’s root port fails, its alternate
port is ready to immediately become the root
port, with no transitional states.
This immediate move to forwarding state functions
like a classic STP optional feature called
UplinkFast.
Because it is built into RSTP, you do not
need to activate UplinkFast when using RSTP or Rapid
PVST+.
We didn’t look at UplinkFast in the previous
videos, its not mentioned in the exam topics
list, but try to remember that its functions
are built into rapid spanning tree, you might
get asked about that on the exam.
So, UplinkFast is one STP optional feature
that was incorporated into RSTP.
Since I just mentioned one, I’d like to
briefly explain one more that was incorporated
into RSTP.
Neither of these are on the exam topics list
so you don’t have to learn them in depth,
but just be aware of their general functionality,
because they are part of RSTP.
One more STP optional feature that was built
into RSTP is BackboneFast.
Let’s say SW2’s root port is cut off,
so it stops receiving BPDUs from the root
bridge.
It will then assume it is the root bridge,
so it will send it’s own BPDUs to SW3.
However, SW3 is now receiving BPDUs from both
SW1 and SW2, but SW2’s BPDUs are inferior,
they have a higher bridge ID.
Without this backbonefast functionality, SW3
would just ignore these BPDUs from SW2 until
it’s non-designated port, in classic STP,
finally changes to a forwarding state and
forwards the superior BPDUs to SW2, which
then accepts SW1 as its root bridge again.
However, BackboneFast allows SW3 to expire
the max age timer on that interface and rapidly
forward the superior BPDUs to SW2.
This functionality is built into RSTP, so
it does not need to be configured.
So, that’s a very basic explanation of BackboneFast.
Let’s look at a quick summary on the next
slide.
UplinkFast and BackboneFast are two optional
features in classic STP.
They must be configured to operate on the
switch, but it’s not necessary to know how
to do so for the CCNA.
Both features are built into RSTP, so if the
switch is running RSTP, you do not have to
configure them.
They operate by default on all switches running
RSTP.
Finally, You do not need to have a detailed
understanding of them for the CCNA.
I recommend that you know their names and
their basic purpose, which is to help blocking or discarding
ports move to forwarding without delay.
If you want to learn more, do a Google search
for ‘spanning tree uplinkfast’ or ‘spanning
tree backbonefast’.
Learning how to effectively search on Google
for information is an essential part of being
a good network engineer, to be honest.
We Google things all the time in our daily
work, and you can bet I Google things a lot
when preparing these videos.
So, if you ever want to learn more about a
topic in one of these videos, take the chance
to improve your Google skills and try to search
for some good resources.
Okay, after that little detour, let’s look
at the last port role in RSTP.
We just saw the alternate port role, which
is just like the non-designated port role
we saw in the previous lectures.
Next up lets look at the backup port role.
The RSTP backup port role is a discarding
port that receives a superior BPDU from another
interface on the same switch.
This only happens when two interfaces are
connected to the same collision domain, via
a hub.
Notice that there is now an ethernet hub connected
between SW2 and SW3.
When BPDUs are sent in this nework, the BPDU
sent out of SW2’s designated port is flooded
by the hub, and as you can see here it receives
that same BPDU on a different interface.
That’s why this interface is a backup port,
not an alternate port.
However, I’ve already told you that hubs
are not used in modern networks, so you will
probably not encounter an RSTP backup port.
It’s still something you should know.
RSTP backup ports function as a backup for
a designated port.
If SW2’s designated port fails, its backup
port immediately begins forwarding traffic
as a designated port.
Now, as for how the switch chooses which port
will be the designated port and which will
be the backup port, the interface with the
lowest port ID will be selected as the designated
port, and the other will be the backup port.
Before moving on let’s try out a quiz question.
Identify the root bridge, and the RSTP port
role of each switch interface in this network.
By the way, the hub doesn’t participate
in spanning tree.
Hubs aren’t sophisticated enough to use
spanning tree, so it just floods all frames
it receives.
Okay, pause the video here to find the answer.
Okay, let’s check the answer.
The root bridge is SW1, because all switches
have the same priority and SW1 has the lowest
MAC address, it is elected as the root.
Its interfaces are designated ports.
These are the root ports for each switch.
SW2 and SW3’s root ports are obvious, they
have the lowest root cost.
How about SW4’s root port?
The hub doesn’t participate in STP so it
doesn’t add any cost to the BPDU, so why
did SW4 choose G0/1 over G0/0?
It’s because the neighbor bridge ID is lower
via G0/1, because SW2 has a lower MAC address
than SW3.
SW2’s G0/1 connected to SW4’s G0/1 becomes
designated.
Now, how about the connection between SW3
and SW4?
First of all, which switch sets its interface
to designated?
Well, SW3 has a lower root cost, so one of
its interfaces will be the designated port.
Which one?
G0/0 has the lower port ID, so it will be
the designated port in this collision domain.
How about SW3’s G0/1 and SW4’s G0/0?
SW3’s G0/1 receives the superior BPDU, with
the lower port ID, from the same switch, so
it's a backup port.
SW4’s G0/0 receives the superior BPDU from
a different switch, so it is an alternate
port.
Okay, those are the answers.
Hopefully you answered correctly.
If not, don’t worry, there will be more
practice at the end of the video.
Now let’s take a quick look at the CLI,
I’m on SW3 here.
As I showed you in the last video, there are
three STP modes you can run on a Cisco switch,
MST, PVST, and rapid-PVST.
Rapid-PVST is the default on modern Cisco
switches, so you probably won’t have to
use this command, but I entered SPANNING-TREE
MODE RAPID-PVST to make sure it runs in rapid
pvst mode.
Then I used SHOW SPANNING-TREE to confirm.
Notice that it says ‘Spanning tree enabled
protocol rstp’.
Previously when we were using classic STP,
it said ‘ieee’, now it says ‘rstp’.
Although it says ‘rstp’, this is in fact
Cisco’s Rapid PVST+ running.
Now, the only other difference I want to point
out is this.
As shown in the network diagram, SW3’s G0/1
interface has the ‘backup’ role.
The status is still listed as BLK for ‘blocking’,
although this state is actually called ‘discarding’
in rapid STP.
I used the SHOW SPANNING-TREE command on SW4
also.
As in the network diagram, SW4’s G0/0 interface
is an ‘Alternate’ port.
Once again, this command lists the status
as ‘blocking’, but remember the rapid
STP name for this state is actually ‘discarding’.
Just one note about running different STP
versions, Rapid STP IS compatible with classic
STP.
The interface, or interfaces, on the rapid
STP-enabled switch connected to the classic
STP-enabled switch will operate in classic
STP mode, with the same timers, the same blocking
to listening to learning to forwarding state
process, etc.
So, if you have a really old switch that doesn’t
run rapid STP, you can still use it in a network
of rapid STP-enabled switches, they will adjust
the operation of those specific interfaces
to match the slower switch.
So, in our network diagram, if SW4 was running
classic STP, SW2 and SW3 would make these
interfaces run in classic STP mode, but their
interfaces connected to SW1 would remain in
rapid STP mode.
Next let’s look at the updated BPDU for
RSTP.
Here on the left is the classic STP BPDU for
comparsion, I made it smaller so you can see
the rapid STP BPDU better.
Most of the BPDU remains unchanged, but there
are some differences you should know.
As I mentioned last time, you don’t need
to memorize the BPDU, that’s more depth
than is required for the CCNA.
You just need to know a few aspects of it
and what kinds of things are included in it.
The first difference to know between these
two BPDUs is here . Notice that the RSTP BPDU
has a protocol version of 2, whereas classic
spanning tree has a version of 0.
Remember these version numbers for the exam,
0 for classic STP, 2 for rapid STP.
The rapid STP BPDU also has a BPDU type of
2.
Now, the next difference is here.
The classic STP BPDU uses only two bits of
the BPDU flags, the 1st bit and the 8th bit.
However, the rapid STP BPDU uses all 8 bits.
These flags are used in the negotiation process
that allows rapid STP to converge much faster
than classic STP.
That’s all you really need to know about
the rapid STP BPDU itself, compared to the
previous version.
But there is one more major difference.
In classic STP, only the root bridge originated
BPDUs, the other switches just forwarded the
BPDUs they received.
In rapid STP, ALL switches originate and send
their own BPDUs from their designated ports.
Let’s go through a few other differences.
First, as I just said, all switches running
rapid STP send their own BPDUs.
Switches also ‘age’ the BPDU information
much more quickly.
In classic STP, a switch waits 10 hello intervals,
which is 20 seconds.
In rapid STP, a switch considers a neighbor
lost if it misses 3 BPDUs, which is 6 seconds.
It will then ‘flush’, meaning delete,
all MAC addresses learned on that interface.
Why does it do this?
Because the neighbor is down, it knows it
cant reach anything through that interface
any more.
For example, in this network traffic from
PC1 to PC2 usually follows this path.
But what if this connection is cut off?
This switch will think: I can’t reach this
neighbor anymore.
I’ll clear all entries for this interface from
my MAC table, and its other interface will
become the root port.
Then, if PC1 wants to send traffic to PC2
again, it will go through the normal process
of flooding until it learns the MAC address
on this new interface, and traffic will now
follow this path.
That’s just a quick look at how topology
changes are handled in rapid STP.
There is a lot of depth that we could go into
about this, but its not necessary for the
CCNA.
If you want to go on to get your CCNP and
CCIE, you’ll definitely have to study these
processes more in depth.
Before I summarize everything and move on
to the quiz, there is one more concept of
RSTP you should know, the RSTP link types.
RSTP distinguishes between three different
‘link types’.
The first type is edge.
An edge port is a port that is connected to
an end host.
It moves directly to forwarding without negotiation.
Does this sound similar?
It sounds like portfast.
Well, the portfast functionality was built
into RSTP.
So, there’s another STP optional feature
built into RSTP by default, UplinkFast, BackboneFast,
and now PortFast.
The next link type is point-to-point.
This is used for direct connections between
two switches.
However, there is one more type, although
it is one you probably won’t use at all.
That type is shared.
This is a connection to a hub, like we saw
earlier in the video.
These connections must operate in half-duplex
to avoid collisions.
Don’t confuse these link types with the
spanning tree port roles or port states.
Basically, the point-to-point and shared link
types just distinguish between full- and half-duplex
connections, and the edge type is a port that
uses portfast.
Okay, let’s take a quick look at each type.
As I said, edge ports are connected to end
hosts.
Because there is no risk of creating a loop,
they can move straight to the forwarding state
without the negotiation process.
They function like a classic STP port with
PortFast enabled.
In fact, you configure an edge port simply
by enabling portfast on the port.
Here is the command, just like in classic
STP.
So really, portfast and an RSTP edge port
are the same thing.
In this network down here, which ports should
be configured as edge ports?
Pause the video if you want to think about
it.
Got the answer?
All of these ports, the ones connected to
the PCs, should be configured as edge ports.
Next up, point-to-point.
These ports connect directly to another switch.
Because they connect to a switch, not a hub,
they function in full-duplex mode.
You don’t need to configure the interface
as point-to-point, the switch should be able
to detect that it is connected directly to
another switch and will operate in full-duplex
as a point-to-point port.
However, if you want to explicitly configure
the point-to-point link type, use this command:
SPANNING-TREE LINK-TYPE POINT-TO-POINT.
So, which connections in the diagram are point-to-point?
Pause the video to think about it.
Did you find the answer?
It’s these three, the direct connections
between two switches.
Finally, shared ports connect to a hub.
Due to the nature of hubs and the likelihood
of collisions, these links must function in
half duplex.
Once again, you don’t need to configure
the interface in shared mode, the switch will
detect it.
However, to manually configure it, use this
command: SPANNING-TREE LINK-TYPE SHARED.
Although you should be aware of this type
of RSTP link, as I already said, you will
probably never actually see this link type
in real networks, hubs are old technology
that have been fully replaced by switches.
So, which connections in the diagram are shared
connections?
I think the answer is fairly obvious now,
all of the remaining ones, which are connected
to the hub.
So, these connections here are shared links.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s summarize
what we covered today.
First up, we compared the different versions
of STP.
The classic STP is 802.1D, and Cisco’s upgrade
is PVST+, which runs a separate spanning tree
instance for each VLAN.
Then the next standard version is 802.1w,
rapid spanning tree protocol.
Cisco’s version of this is Rapid PVST+,
which again runs a separate instance for each
VLAN.
Then there is one more industry standard,
multiple spanning tree, with which you can
create multiple spanning tree instances, and
group multiple VLANs within each instance.
There is no Cisco version of MSTP, Cisco switches
run the industry standard protocol.
Then we looked at Rapid PVST+, but actually
all of the information we looked at applies
to the industry standard RSTP as well.
RSTP is an evolution of classic STP.
Instead of using timers, it uses a negotiation
process to allow it to rapidly move the necessary
ports to a forwarding state, and rapidly adjust
to changes in the network topology.
I didn’t mention any specifics of the negotiation
process, that level of depth is not necessary
for the CCNA.
I told you about the port states in RSTP,
there are only three.
Discarding, Learning, and Forwarding.
The listening state was deemed unnecessary,
and in fact the learning state is often skipped
due to the built-in features of rapid STP,
like UplinkFast and BackboneFast.
We talked about RSTP port roles, there are
four.
Root and designated ports are the same, but
RSTP distinguishes between two types of ports
in the discarding state.
Alternate ports are discarding ports which
receive a superior BPDU from another switch,
this is the usual case.
Backup ports, on the other hand, receive a
superior BPDU from an interface on the same
switch.
This only occurs if connected to a hub, which
is a situation you’ll probably never encounter,
hubs are no longer used.
I also mentioned some optional features of
classic STP which were built into RSTP.
First I showed you UplinkFast and BackboneFast,
but PortFast is also built in, through the
edge port function.
Although you have to know PortFast for the
CCNA, you don’t need a detailed understanding
of UplinkFast and BackboneFast.
I briefly showed you the RSTP BPDU, just remember
that the protocol version in an RSTP BPDU
is 2, whereas in classic STP it’s 0.
Also remember the important point that in
RSTP ALL switches send BPDUs, not just the
root bridge.
Finally, I showed you the RSTP link types.
Edge ports are connected to end hosts, and
you configure an edge port by enabling portfast
on the interface.
Point-to-point means it is connected directly
to another switch, and shared means it is
connected to a hub, and must use half-duplex.
As I said before, hubs aren’t really used
anymore, so you probably won’t see a ‘shared’
link type in any real networks.
Okay let’s move on to the quiz.
After a few quiz questions, let’s take a
look at my favorite set of practice exams
for the CCNA, Boson Software’s ExSim.
Back before I started this YouTube channel,
I used Boson ExSim to prepare for my CCNA
and CCNP exams, and I really think ExSim played
a big role in me passing all of my exams on
the first try.
The questions are very similar to the questions
on the real CCNA exam, and Boson gives in
depth explanations which really help deepen
your understanding of the topics.
Okay, now continuing on from quiz question
1, which we did earlier in the video, let’s
go to quiz question 2.
Which IEEE 802.1D optional features were built
in to the IEEE 802.1w standard, and allow
ports to move rapidly to the forwarding state?
Select three.
A, root guard, B, portfast.
C, BPDU guard.
D, uplinkfast.
E, backbonefast.
F, loop guard.
Or G, rootfast.
Pause the video to think about your answers.
The answers are B, portfast.  D, uplinkfast, and e, backbonefast.
A, root guard, C BPDU guard, and F, loop guard,
are spanning tree optional features, but they
are not features built in to RSTP that allow
ports to move rapidly to the forwarding state.
G, rootfast, is not a real STP optional feature.
B, portfast, allows edge ports, connected
to end hosts, to move rapidly to the forwarding
state.
D, uplinkfast, and E, backbonefast, allow
ports to move rapidly to forwarding in certain
cases of interface failure.
Let’s go to question 3.
You want to configure an 802.1w edge port,
so that hosts connected to the interface can
begin sending traffic over the network immediately.
Which command should you use?
A, spanning-tree link-type edge.
B, spanning-tree mode edge.
C, spanning-tree link-type portfast.
Or D, spanning-tree portfast.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is D, spanning-tree portfast.
Although ‘edge’ is a link type in RSTP,
you don’t use the spanning-tree link-type
command to configure it, and the command doesn’t
even include the word edge.
To configure an RSTP edge port, simply configure
portfast on the interface with the command
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
Okay, let’s do one more quiz question.
Identify the root bridge in this network.
What is the RSTP port role of each switch
(port)?
What is the appropriate RSTP link type of
each connection between devices?
This is a pretty long question, I recommend
taking a screenshot and writing the port roles
and link types on the screenshot so you can
remember everything.
Pause the video now to find the answers.
Okay, hopefully you solved it.
The root bridge is SW1, it has the lowest
priority.
How about all of the root ports in the network?
Here they are.
SW4 picked it’s G0/0 interface because SW3
has a lower bridge ID than SW2, even though
they have the same root cost because the hub
doesn’t add any cost.
So, these are the designated ports.
Why was an interface on SW2 and not SW4
selected to be designated?
Because SW2 has the lower root cost.
Finally, the discarding interfaces.
Notice that there is one backup interface,
SW2’s G0/2 interface.
This is because it receives a superior BPDU
from an interface on the same switch, the
G0/1 interface.
Now, how about the link types?
All of these ports connected to end hosts
should be edge ports.
All of these full-duplex connections between
switches are point-to-point links, and these
half-duplex connections with the hub are shared
links.
If you had trouble with this, you should review
the spanning tree videos, including this one,
and if you still don’t understand feel free
to ask a question in the comment section.
Okay, now let’s check out a question from
Boson ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson ExSim practice question,
I picked a question that mentions edge ports,
something you just learned about.
So here's the question.
Which of the following optional STP features
reduces convergence time by immediately placing
edge ports into a forwarding state?
Select the best answer.
So there are five options.
A, root guard.
B, BPDU guard.
C, PortFast.
D, BPDU filter.
And E, loop guard.  Pause the video to think about your answer.
Okay, did you find your answer?
So, first of all what is an edge port?
Well it's a port at the edge of the network,
meaning it's connected to end hosts, it's
not the internal network between the switches.
So, which optional feature places ports connected
to end hosts immediately into a forwarding
state?
You should know the answer by now, it is C,
PortFast.
If you're actually doing a practice exam you
can click next to go to the next question,
but let's check the answer, show answer.
Okay, and we are correct.
So you can see it gives quite a detailed explanation,
and this is really the great thing about Boson
ExSim, about their practice exams.
Not only does it tell you why PortFast is
the correct answer, but here it gives you
a brief summary of each of these other optional
features.
Loop guard, root guard, BPDU guard and BPDU
filter.
So you can know why they are not the correct
answer.
After all that it gives some references to
the official cert guide here, this is from
chapter 9, optional STP features.
And then also some Cisco documentation that
you can read online for free, and this is
another great study resource by the way, Cisco's
official documentation.
Okay, if you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim
for yourself, please follow the link in the
video description.
I used Boson ExSim myself for my CCNA and
CCNP and I really think they were essential
in helping me pass all of my exams on the
first try.
So once again, please click that link in the
video description and get a copy of Boson
ExSim.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’, download it from the
link in the description and use the flashcards
to review the concepts you learned in this
video.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to tibi, vikram, Joyce, Marek, Samil,
velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel,
Yousif, Kone, Boson Software, the creators
of ExSim, Sidi, Magrathea, Devin, Charlsetta,
Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksander, Vance, and
Gerrard.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, May 27th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.