Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will look at another topic,
EtherChannel.
EtherChannel allows you to group multiple
physical interfaces into a group which operates
as a single logical interface, so they behave
as if they are a single interface.
There are many benefits to this, and I’ll
explain them in this video.
By the way, this video covers topic 2.4 of
the official exam topics list, which states
that you must be able to configure and verify
Layer 2 and Layer 3 EtherChannel using a protocol
called LACP, Link Aggregation Control Protocol.
So, what will we cover in this video?
First off, I’ll show you what EtherChannel
is, and what problems it solves.
Here’s a hint, spanning tree protocol is
the big problem.
We will also look at multiple methods of configuring
both Layer 2 and Layer 3 EtherChannels.
A Layer 2 etherchannel is a group of switch
ports which operate as a single interface,
and a Layer 3 etherchannel is a group of routed
port which operate as a single interface,
which you assign an IP address to, because
it’s Layer 3.
Make sure you watch until the end of the video
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
I used Boson ExSim to help me prepare for
my CCNA and CCNP exams, and I truly believe
it was the key that allowed me to pass
all of my exams on the first try.
Okay, let’s get started with the video.
So, let me demonstrate a problem.
We have two switches here, ASW1 and DSW1.
I will talk about basic network design later
in the course, but ASW stands for access switch,
which is a switch that end hosts like PCs
and servers connect to.
DSW stands for distribution layer switch,
which is a switch that access layer switches
connect to.
For this demonstration, let’s say there
are many end hosts connected to ASW1, let’s
say 40 hosts, and they are all trying to access
the Internet to do their work.
The network administrator notices that the
connection to DSW1 is congested, so he decides
that he should add another link to increase
the bandwidth, so it can support all of the
end hosts.
So, the network admin adds another link, and
monitors the situation.
However, the additional link doesn’t seem
to help.
The connection between ASW1 and DSW1 is still
congested and end users are reporting problems.
So, the admin decides to add another link
between ASW1 and DSW1.
He adds another link to the connection between
ASW1 and DSW1.
Surely, this will be sufficient.
The total bandwidth of the connections to
the end hosts is still greater than the bandwidth
of the connection to DSW1, but that’s okay,
all hosts in the network aren’t always in
a constant state of sending and receiving
Internet traffic.
I will talk more about this later in the course,
but when the bandwidth of the interfaces connected
to end hosts is greater than the bandwidth
of the connection to the distribution switches,
this is called oversubscription.
Some oversubscription is acceptable, but too
much will cause congestion.
However, even with three links to DSW1 the
congestion doesn’t seem any better, so the
network admin once again decides to add another
link between ASW1 and DSW1.
So, now there are four links between ASW1
and DSW1.
Do you think things have improved?
Well, they haven’t, the connection between
the two switches is just as congested as before.
Why is this?
You should be able to figure out the answer.
Here’s a hint, think about what you just
studied in days 20, 21, and 22 of this course.
If you know the answer, well done, if not
don’t worry about it, you will now.
Let’s say the administrator went to physically
look at the port lights of the two switches.
What color do you think they were?
Well, the network admin checks DSW1 and all
of the port lights are green, so there doesn’t
seem to be a problem.
However, when he checks ASW1 he notices that,
of the links connected to DSW1, only one light
is green, and the others are orange.
Why is that?
It’s because of what we studied in the past
few days of this course, spanning tree protocol.
If you connect two switches together with
multiple links, all except one will be disabled
by spanning tree.
Why does it do this?
Well, if all of ASW1’s interfaces were forwarding,
Layer 2 loops would form between ASW1 and
DSW1, leading to broadcast storms.
Other links will be unused unless the active
link fails.
In that case, one of the inactive links will
start forwarding.
So, although having backup links is a good
thing, because failures can occur for various
reasons, it’s a waste of bandwidth to have
these three interfaces disabled, not forwarding
any traffic.
However, by forming these four physical interfaces
into one logical interface, EtherChannel can
solve this problem, giving us both redundancy
and increased bandwidth.
An EtherChannel is represented in network
diagrams by drawing a circle around the interfaces
that are grouped together, like this.
EtherChannel groups multiple interfaces together
to act as a single interface.
STP will treat this group as a single interface.
So, after grouping these interfaces into an
etherchannel the network admin once again
checks the link lights.
This time they are all green.
Won’t this cause a Layer 2 loop?
Actually no, because this group of four links
behaves as if it is a single link.
For example, let’s say a PC sends a broadcast
frame.
So, it is flooded out all interfaces on ASW1.
All of the PCs connected to ASW1 will receive
a copy of the frame.
Now, how many copies of the frame will DSW1
receive?
Remember, although there are four physical
interfaces, they behave as a single interface.
The answer is, DSW1 will only receive one
copy.
This EtherChannel makes these four physical
interfaces a single logical interface, ASW1
won’t sent four copies of the same broadcast
frame out of a single interface.
Traffic using the EtherChannel will be load
balanced among the physical interfaces in
the group.
An algorithm is used to determine which traffic
will use which physical interface.
I will give you more details on this later.
So, DSW1 received the broadcast frame.
What will it do now?
It will flood the broadcast frame out of all
interfaces, except the one it was received
on.
So let’s say DSW1 has these two other links
here.
Which interfaces will DSW1 forward the frame
out of?
Only these two.
Why didn’t it forward the frame out of the
other three interfaces in the etherchannel?
I’ll repeat it once more, although this
etherchannel contains four separate physical
interfaces, they behave as a single interface.
DSW1 won’t send the broadcast frame back
out of the same interface it was received
on.
So it isn’t forwarded back to ASW1, and
no Layer 2 loop is formed.
It’s kind of like this, instead of four
separate interfaces, perhaps gigabit ethernet
interfaces, connecting ASW1 to DSW1, it’s
as if there is a single four-gigabit ethernet
interface.
The bandwidth of the four separate interfaces
is combined to form one faster interface,
a virtual four-gigabit interface.
The difference between the physical characteristics
and the logical or virtual characteristics
of a network are something you need to understand
as a network engineer.
For example we studied VLANs.
Multiple PCs can all be connected to the same
switch and therefore be in the same LAN, however
VLANs virtually divide these PCs into separate
virtual LANs, each behaving as a separate
LAN.
Likewise, these interfaces exist as four separate
physical interfaces, but now they form a single
virtual interface.
Some other names for an EtherChannel are a
Port Channel and a LAG, which stands for Link
Aggregation Group.
You’ll see that, to configure an etherchannel
in Cisco IOS, you need to use a few different
terms.
Now let’s take a look at how etherchannel
load balances.
It load balances based on ‘flows’.
What is a flow?
A flow is a communication between two nodes
in the network.
So for example, between PC1 and SRV1.
By the way, you usually won’t see a server
or a printer connected directly to a distribution
layer switch, these are also end hosts which
you should connect to the access layer switches.
Just to simplify this network diagram I’ll
leave it like this, though.
So, let’s say PC1 initiates an exchange
of data with SRV1, and it sends a few frames
to do so.
The frame is received by ASW1, and assuming
it already knows the MAC address of SRV1,
it will forward the frame out of the port
channel to DSW1.
However, which physical interface will it
use?
Well, there is an algorithm it uses to calculate
which physical interface the traffic will
actually be sent on, let’s say it determines
that this interface should be used.
Now, when PC1 sends the next frame in the
flow, in the communication between PC1 and
SRV1, the same interface will be used to forward
the traffic to SRV1.
So, the point is that frames in the same flow
will be forwarded using the same physical
interface.
If frames in the same flow were forwarded
using different physical interfaces, some
frames may arrive at the destination out of
order, which can cause problems.
Some applications can deal with frames arriving
out of order, but some applications can’t.
Now, if PC1 wants to print something and initiates
a separate communication flow with PR1, ASW1
will once again forward the frame using its
virtual port channel interface.
However, it will make a separate calculation
to determine which physical interface will
be used for the flow.
For example, it might determine that this
interface will be used for the flow.
Just like before, when PC1 sends another frame
in the flow, the same member interface of
the etherchannel will be used to forward it.
How about if PC2 also wants to print something?
It sends the first frame in the flow to ASW1,
which will then do a calculation to determine
which physical interface in the etherchannel
will be used.
perhaps this one is used.
So, this is how EtherChannel performs load
balancing, by using different physical interfaces
in the etherchannel for different flows.
The calculation that is done to determine
which physical interface to use takes into
account a few inputs.
Actually, you can change the inputs used in
the interface selection calculation.
Here are the inputs that can be used.
Source MAC address.
So, all frames with the same source MAC address
will always use the same interface in the
etherchannel.
Or, destination MAC address.
In this case, all frames with the same destination
MAC address will always use the same physical
interface.
You can also use both the source AND destination
MAC addresses.
So for example, frames from PC1 to SRV1 will
use always use a certain interface, frames
from PC2 to SRV1 will always use a certain
interface, which might be the same or different
than the one used for traffic from PC1 to
SRV1, frames from PC1 to PR1 might use another
different interface, etc.
The calculation is done based on both the
source and destination MAC addresses.
You can also configure etherchannel to select
the interface based on the source IP address,
destination IP address, or both source AND
destination IP addresses.
Some switches also support load-balancing
based on the Layer 4 TCP or UDP port numbers,
but those are a topic for another lesson.
Also, which methods the switch can use depends
on the switch model, some may only support
using the MAC addresses, some may support
only MAC or IP addresses, and some may support
all methods.
So, we haven’t actually configured an etherchannel
yet, but since I just mentioned it let’s
take a look at how to check and configure
the load-balancing method.
Use the command SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE
to see the current load-balancing method.
You can see the default for this model of
switch is to load balance based on the source
and destination IP addresses.
So, for example, all traffic from 10.0.0.1
with a destination of 10.0.0.2 will always
use a certain physical interface within the
etherchannel.
Down here you can see a more specific breakdown.
Frames which encapsulate IP packets, whether
IPv4 or IPv6, will be load-balanced based
on the source and destination IP addresses.
However, notice at the top it says non-IP
will use the source and destination MAC addresses.
Well, that’s because if an IP packet isn’t
encapsulated in the Ethernet frame, there
is no IP address that can be used to determine
the load-balancing, so the MAC addresses are
used instead.
Now, as for how to change the load-balancing
method, enter global config mode and use this
command.
PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE, followed by the
method.
In this case I changed it to use the source
and destination MAC addresses of the frame.
Then I confirmed once more, and you can see
the load-balancing configuration has been
successfully changed.
By the way, here are the choices available
on this device.
It can load-balance based on MAC or IP addresses,
and in either case it can load-balanced based
on either the source, the destination, or
both the source AND destination addresses.
Now, I want to point out one thing which is
a little frustrating about etherchannel configuration
on Cisco devices.
What keyword do you use to configure the load-balancing method?
PORT-CHANNEL.
And what keyword do you use to view the load-balancing
method?
ETHERCHANNEL.
Different words are used for the same thing,
which is a bit frustrating.
Actually, later you’ll find that there is
even one more that you need to remember.
So, these are the first two commands to remember
for this video.
SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE, to check the
load-balancing method being used.
And, PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE, followed by
the load-balancing method, to configure the
load-balancing.
Now let’s get into actually creating an
EtherChannel between two switches.
There are three methods of EtherChannel configuration.
First up is PAgP, which stands for Port Aggregation
Protocol.
It is a Cisco proprietary protocol, so it
can only be used on Cisco switches.
If you’re trying to form an EtherChannel
with a Juniper switch, for example, you can’t
use PAgP.
Now, what does PAgP do?
It dynamically negotiates the creation and
maintenance of the EtherChannel.
Just a few days ago we covered DTP, which
does a similar thing regarding trunk formation.
Frames are sent to the neighboring switch
to see if it wants to form an EtherChannel,
and then the switches agree upon either forming
an EtherChannel or not.
Okay, the next method of configuration is
LACP, which stands for Link Aggregation Control
Protocol.
It is an industry standard protocol, once
again from our friends at the IEEE, its code
is 802.3ad.
Basically, it does the same thing as PAgP.
It dynamically negotiates the creation and
maintenance of the EtherChannel, like DTP
does for trunks.
Because it is an industry standard protocol,
it doesn’t run only on Cisco switches, so
it can be used to form EtherChannels with
switches from other vendors.
Because of this, LACP is the preferred method
of configuring EtherChannels.
Actually, the exam topics list only states
LACP.
However, for the test you really should be
familiar with the other methods, for some
reason Cisco’s exam topics lists aren’t
very reliable.
So, the last method is static EtherChannel.
In this case a protocol isn’t used to determine
if an EtherChannel should be formed.
Instead, interfaces are statically configured
to form an EtherChannel.
This is usually avoided, because you want
the switches to dynamically maintain the EtherChannel,
for example you want the switch to remove
an interface from the EtherChannel if there
is some sort of problem on the interface.
Okay, finally, up to 8 interfaces can be formed
into a single EtherChannel.
Actually, LACP allows up to 16, but only 8
will be active, the other 8 will be in standby
mode, waiting for an active interface to fail.
So let’s look into how to configure each
method.
The configuration for each is almost identical,
you just have to swap out some keywords.
First I used the interface range command to
configure all of the member interfaces at
once.
This is a good idea for EtherChannel, because
the configurations on each member interface
must match, so if you configure them all at
once you can guarantee that.
I’ll talk more about that after I show you
the configurations.
Anyway, to actually configure the EtherChannel
use this command, with yet another new keyword.
CHANNEL-GROUP, followed by a number that identifies
the virtual interface, MODE, and then as you
can see I used the question mark to see what
options there are.
There are five options, two of them are used
for PAgP, two for LACP, and one for static
etherchannel.
These two are used for PAgP.
Do you recognize these names from another
Cisco proprietary protocol?
DTP used the same modes to form trunks, and
the function of each mode is basically the
same.
Desirable mode actively tries to form an EtherChannel,
and auto mode will only form an EtherChannel
if the other side is set to desirable, but
not if the other side is set to auto.
So here’s a summary.
If both sides of the connection are set to
auto, no etherchannel will be formed.
However, auto and desirable, or desirable
and desirable, will form an etherchannel.
Anyway, I decided to configure this side as
desirable.
You can see that the virtual port-channel
interface was created, with the number we
used in the channel-group command.
You can see it here in the output of the SHOW
IP INTERFACE BRIEF command, down at the bottom.
So, remember that the CHANNEL-GROUP command
is used to configure the etherchannel, but
the name of the virtual interface that is
created is ‘port-channel’.
By the way, this channel group number has
to match between interfaces on the same switch,
however it DOESN’T have to match the channel-group
number on the other switch.
For example, channel-group 1 on ASW1 can form
an EtherChannel with channel-group 2 on DSW1.
The number is just used to identify the virtual
interface number on the local switch.
Because you can have multiple etherchannels
on a single switch, you need the number to
identify them.
Next let’s look at LACP configuration.
After explaining all of that, there’s not
much else to explain about LACP.
Just notice that mode names are different.
Instead of desirable, LACP uses active mode.
And instead of auto, LACP uses passive mode.
So, if both ends are configured in passive
mode an EtherChannel won’t be formed.
However, active and passive, or active and
active, will form an EtherChannel.
In this case, I configured this side as active.
Once again, the port-channel interface is
created.
Note that, even if you configure both sides
as passive, the virtual interface will still
be created on each switch.
However, it won’t actually be functioning
as an EtherChannel unless one side is in active
mode.
So, as you can see the command is basically
the same, just the mode names are different.
Once again, the channel-group number has to
match between member interfaces on the local
switch, but it doesn’t have to match the
number on the neighbor switch.
Finally, let’s see how static EtherChannel
is configured.
There aren’t two separate modes, just one,
‘ON’ which manually tells these interfaces
to form an EtherChannel.
This will create a port-channel interface,
just like before.
By the way, on mode only works with on mode.
On and desirable, or on and active will not
successfully form an EtherChannel.
Another command you should know is the CHANNEL-PROTOCOL command.
This manually configures the EtherChannel
negotiation protocol that the member interfaces
should use.
This actually isn’t a very useful command,
because you don’t need to configure it.
If you configure CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE DESIRABLE
or AUTO, the interface will automatically
use PAgP, or if you configure CHANNEL-GROUP
1 MODE ACTIVE or PASSIVE, the interface will
automatically use LACP.
So, there isn’t really a point in using
this command.
However, I think you should know it for the
exam at least, so here’s a brief explanation.
Of course there are two options, LACP and
PAGP, I decided to configure LACP.
Then I tried the CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE DESIRABLE
command, but it was rejected because of the
protocol mismatch.
I manually configured these interfaces to
use LACP, but the desirable mode is PAgP,
so the command was rejected.
If I try CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ON it is rejected
as well.
Then I do CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ACTIVE, and
the command works, because active mode is
LACP.
So, after configuring the EtherChannel, in
whatever mode, PAgP, LACP, or static, you
can then configure the port-channel interface
itself.
Note that I’m just using the LACP example
here, since all of this information is the
same regardless of which method you use.
I also did the same configurations over on
DSW1, so the EtherChannel is up and running.
I entered interface config mode for the port-channel
1 interface, and then configured it as a trunk.
Now in the output of SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK,
you can see port-channel 1, listed as Po1,
is a trunk.
Notice that the individual physical interfaces
aren’t listed here, only the port-channel
interface.
Here’s a section of the output of SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG.
There’s something interesting to notice
here.
The trunk configurations that I configured
on the port-channel interface were also applied
to the physical interfaces, I didn’t manually
configure the physical interfaces as trunks.
Now, one more important point about EtherChannel
configuration.
Member interfaces, the physical interfaces
in the EtherChannel, must have matching configurations.
What do I mean by that?
They must have the same duplex setting.
They must have the same speed.
They must have the same switchport mode, meaning
access or trunk.
If they are a trunk, they must have the same
allowed VLANs and native VLANs.
If an individual interface’s configurations
do not match the others, it will be excluded
from the EtherChannel.
When it comes to verifying the status of an
EtherChannel using SHOW commands, the most
useful command is SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
Down here is a list of the port-channel interfaces
on the switch.
Next to port-channel 1 it has two flags, an
upper-case S and upper-case U.
To check the meaning of these, look at the
legend up top.
S means it is a Layer 2 etherchannel.
S stands for switchport, by the way.
U means in use, meaning the EtherChannel is
active and being used.
Next to the physical ports there is the flag
‘P’.
This means that these ports are properly bundled
in the port-channel.
These are the flags you want to see in an
operational Layer 2 EtherChannel.
Now, let’s take a look at a couple situations
in which we will see other flags.
So, I shutdown the port-channel 1 interface.
Now next to both the port-channel interface
and the member interfaces you can see the
flag ‘D’.
That means down.
Okay, I’ll enable the interface again and
show you another flag you might see.
Now I changed one of the member interfaces
to access mode.
Now it has the lower-case ‘s’ flag.
Note that this is different than the upper-case
S flag.
It means suspended.
So, only G0/0 is suspended, but the EtherChannel
is still operating with just three interfaces,
G0/1, 2, and 3.
Another command you can use is SHOW ETHERCHANNEL PORT-CHANNEL.
You can see the number of ports in the port-channel,
which protocol is being used etc.
One important bit of information that you
can’t find in SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY
but is displayed in this command is the channel-group
mode, active in this case, because I used
the CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ACTIVE command earlier.
However, for EtherChannel the most common
command you’re going to be using is definitely
SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
I just wanted to show you one other option.
Because I started this video talking about
spanning-tree, let’s see how it is affected
when EtherChannel is configured.
As you can see, only the port-channel interface
is listed, the physical interfaces do not
appear in the output of this command at all.
So, as I said earlier, spanning-tree is treating
these four physical interfaces as a single
logical interface.
Instead of blocking three of them, they can
all forward and receive traffic, with no worry
of Layer 2 loops.
To close off this lecture, let’s take a
brief look at Layer 3 EtherChannels.
I’ve replaced ASW1 and DSW1 with multilayer
switches.
Instead of a Layer 2 connection between them,
let’s use a Layer 3 connection.
Modern network design often leans toward using
Layer 3 connections between switches, because
that way spanning-tree won’t be an issue
anywhere in the network.
We could have four switches interconnected
in a mesh, and if we’re connecting them
with Layer 3 routed ports, all interfaces
will be up and forwarding, none will have
to be disabled due to spanning tree.
Now you may be thinking, didn’t you just
show that EtherChannel means that spanning-tree
doesn’t have to block any ports?
Well, we’re just looking at a connection
between two switches.
Even if we’re using EtherChannel, Layer
2 loops can still occur if multiple switches
are connected together in a loop.
For example, look at this diagram.
All of the connections between switches are
using EtherChannel, but if we don’t block
any of the port-channel interfaces, broadcasts
can still loop around the switches like this
and cause a broadcast storm.
So, spanning-tree will block one of these
port-channel interfaces.
However, if all of these connections between
switches were made using routed ports, not
Layer 2 switchports, there is no need to run
spanning-tree at all.
Routed ports don’t forward Layer 2 broadcasts,
so no Layer 2 loops can be formed.
You already know how to configure routed ports
with the NO SWITCHPORT command.
Let’s see how to configure a Layer 3 EtherChannel.
So, starting from a clean configuration, no
port-channels have been configured yet on
ASW1.
I enter interface range config mode for the
member interfaces, and this time before using
the CHANNEL-GROUP command, I use the NO SWITCHPORT
command to make them Layer 3 routed interfaces.
Then, after using the CHANNEL-GROUP command,
I used SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG to check the config.
Notice that the port-channel interface that
was created has the NO SWITCHPORT command
applied to it automatically.
Now, since we’re making a Layer 3 etherchannel,
we need an IP address.
Where do you think it should be configured?
It should be configured on the port-channel
interface.
So, there it is.
Now, let’s check the SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY
command once more.
So, the only difference in the output is that
instead of the upper-case ‘S’ flag, it
has the ‘R’ flag.
What does that mean?
It means it is a Layer 3 EtherChannel, R stands
for routed port.
In the output of SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF,
you can see the IP address configured on port-channel
1.
So, now ASW1 and DSW1 are like two routers
connected together.
They are connected at Layer 3 and spanning-tree
is not running on the connection between them.
However, just like with the Layer 2 EtherChannel,
traffic will now be load-balanced over the
four member interfaces.
Okay let’s quickly review the commands we
covered.
First is PORT-CHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE, followed
by the mode, which, depending on the switch
model, can involve MAC addresses, IP addresses,
or Layer 4 port numbers, using either the
source, destination, or both source and destination
in the calculation to determine which physical
interface is used to forward any specific
flow of traffic.
To view the current EtherChannel load-balancing
configuration, use SHOW ETHERCHANNEL LOAD-BALANCE.
To configure an interface to be part of an
EtherChannel, use the command CHANNEL-GROUP,
followed by the port-channel number, MODE,
and then the mode, which can be DESIRABLE,
AUTO, ACTIVE, PASSIVE, or ON.
The most useful show command for EtherChannel
is SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY, displaying a
summary of all of the EtherChannels on the
switch and their status.
One more show command you can use is SHOW
ETHERCHANNEL PORT-CHANNEL, which displays
some more detailed information about the port-channel
interfaces on the switch.
Those are all of the commands we learned today.
Of course, there are many more commands that
can be used, but we don’t need to go any
deeper into the concept of EtherChannels.
As long as you understand their basic purpose
and how to set them up and verify their status,
you should be good for the CCNA.
Okay let’s go to today’s quiz.
Watch until the end of the quiz for a bonus
question from Boson ExSim for CCNA, without
a doubt the best practice exams for the CCNA,
and the ones I used when preparing for my
CCNA and CCNP exams.
Let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which of the following channel-group mode
combinations will result in an operational
EtherChannel?
Choose three.
A, on – on.
B, passive – passive.
C, desirable – auto.
D, auto – auto.
E, active – desirable.
F, on – desirable.
Or G, active – active.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answers are A, C, and G.
A, on – on, creates a static EtherChannel,
which doesn’t use PAgP or LACP to negotiate
the EtherChannel.
C, desirable – auto, creates an EtherChannel
using PAgP.
G, active – active, creates an EtherChannel
using LACP.
So, A, C, and G are the correct answers.
B, passive - passive won’t create an etherchannel
because LACP passive mode doesn’t actively
try to form an etherchannel.
Same for D, PAgP auto mode doesn’t actively
try to form an EtherChannel.
E, active – desirable, and F, on – desirable,
mix two different EtherChannel modes, which
won’t result in a valid EtherChannel configuration.
Let’s go to question 2.
In the output of the show etherchannel summary
command, you notice that the physical interfaces
in the EtherChannel you configured have the
flag (P) next to them.
What does this mean?
A, the interfaces are in LACP passive mode.
B, the interfaces are bundled in the port-channel.
C, the interfaces are paused until the other
switch’s EtherChannel is configured.
Or D, the etherchannel is a Layer 2 EtherChannel.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, the interfaces are bundled
in the port-channel.
This is the flag you want to see next to the
member interfaces of an EtherChannel.
Here’s some sample output of SHOW ETHERCHANNEL
SUMMARY.
As you can see, P means the port is bundled
in the port-channel.
Let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following member interface parameters
need to match to form an EtherChannel?
Choose two.
A, Interface ID.
B, IP address.
C, interface speed.
Or D, switchport mode, access or trunk.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answers are C, interface speed, and D,
switchport mode.
These are two of the settings that have to
match for interfaces to form an EtherChannel.
A, interface ID, is unique to each interface,
so it cannot match.
And even if you’re configuring a Layer 3
EtherChannel, the member interfaces won’t
have IP addresses, the IP address must be
configured on the virtual port-channel interface.
So B, IP address, is also incorrect.
Okay, next let’s take a look at a question
about EtherChannel from Boson ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson ExSim practice question
we have a question about EtherChannel.
And this is a really good question, quite
challenging.
So let's take a look.
You issue the following commands on SwitchA
and then on SwitchB, so there are two switches.
So let's see the commands.
First, INTERFACE PORT-CHANNEL 1.
So, this isn't necessary but it creates the
port-channel in advance, before actually doing
the INTERFACE RANGE command.
So this virtual port-channel exists, the interface
exists, but no physical interfaces have been
made members of that virtual interface.
Okay, then we enter the INTERFACE RANGE command
for FastEthernet 0/5 and 6.
We manually configure the channel protocol,
the negotiation protocol, LACP in this case.
And then finally we use the CHANNEL-GROUP
1 MODE ON command.
Now normally, as I showed you in this video,
when you use the CHANNEL-GROUP command the
port-channel interface is automatically created,
so this isn't always necessary.
Okay, so that's SwitchA.
CHANNEL-PROTOCOL LACP, CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE
ON.
How about SwitchB?
Again, we create the virtual port-channel
interface beforehand.
Enter interface range config mode for FastEthernet0/5 and 6, this time we manually configure the
protocol as PAgP, before once again doing
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ON.
So, which of the following statements is true
about the resulting EtherChannel link between
SwitchA and SwitchB?
Select the best answer.
A, a link is formed using LACP because it
was configured first and has priority.
As you can see here, LACP was configured first.
B, no link is formed.
Okay, C, a link is formed using PAgP because
it was configured last and has priority.
So, it was configured here on SwitchB.
And then D, a link is formed without an aggregation
protocol.
So you see both of these switches used the
command CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ON.
This configure static protocol (*EtherChannel),
without an aggregation protocol.
So, what do you think is the answer?
Pause the video here to think about it.
Okay, hopefully you got the answer.
I think the correct answer is B, no link is
formed.
Now, why is that?
So, first you create the port-channel interface.
So it does exist, the virtual interface.
Then you manually configure the channel protocol
on the physical interfaces.
But when you use the command CHANNEL-GROUP
1 MODE ON to tell these physical interfaces
to join this port-channel interface, to join
the EtherChannel, this command will be rejected.
The CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ON command.
Because we already manually configured LACP,
so the only modes you can actually configure
are ACTIVE and PASSIVE.
MODE ON will not work, the command will be
rejected.
And then same thing on SwitchB.
This time instead of LACP it's PAgP.
So you manually configured the channel-protocol
PAgP, so even though this port-channel interface
exists, these interfaces won't actually join
it because the CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ON command
will be rejected.
So, I think B is the correct answer.
Let's check.
And indeed it is.
So here is Boson's explanation, quite a lengthy,
in-detail explanation.
And this is something really great about ExSim.
If you're ever unsure about why B is correct,
or why A, C, and D are incorrect, we've got
all of these great, in-detail explanations
helping you out.
And then finally, at the end there are references.
This is to the official cert guide, EtherChannel
is covered in Volume 1, Chapter 10.
And then also two links to Cisco documentation,
which is freely available online and is also
a great study resource.
Okay, so that's today's Boson ExSim practice
question.
If you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
I really like these practice exams.
I used them myself for my CCNA and CCNP, so
I really feel confident about recommending
them to you.
So once again, follow the link in the video
description to get a copy of Boson ExSim.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Sign up for my mailing list via the link in
the description, and I’ll send you all of
the flashcards and packet tracer lab files
for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to funnydart, Joshua, Scott, Aleksa,
Hassan, Gerrard, Tibi, Vikram, Joyce, Marek,
Samil, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel,
Yousif, Kone, Boson Software, the creators
of ExSim, Sidi, Magrathea, Devin, Charlsetta,
Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksander, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, June 6th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.