Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like
these videos, please subscribe to follow along
with the series. Also, please like and leave
a comment, and share the video to help spread
this free series of videos. Thanks for your
help.
In this video we will return to Layer 3, after
spending quite a while in Layer 2 studying
VLANs, DTP, VTP, Spanning Tree, and EtherChannel. This
video will start a series of videos on dynamic
routing. ‘Dynamic routing’ is in contrast
to ‘static routing’, which we covered
in Day 11 of this course. Static routing involves
manually configuring routes to each destination
with the ‘IP ROUTE’ command. Dynamic routing,
on the other hand, involves configuring a
dynamic routing protocol on the router, and
then letting the router take care of finding
the best routes to destination networks. It’s
called ‘dynamic routing’ because it’s not fixed.
If you add a new LAN, routers will automatically
inform each other about how to get to that
new destination network. If one path to a
destination becomes unavailable, the routers
will automatically start using the next-best
path. Over these next few videos we’re going
to cover a large portion of the exam topics
list. 3.0, IP Connectivity, accounts for 25%
of the CCNA exam, and we’re going to cover
almost all of it, just leaving out 3.5 for
later. We’ve already covered some of the
topics in here, for example we’ve covered
parts of 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3. My plan is to
review some parts we missed from here and
give a general overview of dynamic routing
protocols in today’s video, give an overview
of two routing protocols, RIP and EIGRP, in
Day 25, and then spend another two or three
days to cover OSPF, which is actually the
only dynamic routing protocol mentioned in
the exam topics list, in 3.4. However, even
though OSPF is the only one mentioned, you
still need a basic understanding of other
dynamic routing protocols, and need to be
able to compare and contrast them to OSPF.
Here’s what we’ll cover in today’s video.
First I’ll give a general overview of dynamic
routing protocols, to demonstrate how they
function and why they’re usually preferred
over static routes. There are a few types
of dynamic routing protocols, so I will break
them down. We will then take a brief look
at dynamic routing protocol metrics. A protocol’s
‘metric’ is how it measure how ‘far’
the destination is, like the root cost in
spanning tree protocol, and it’s used to
determine the best route to a destination.
Finally, we’ll talk about something called
‘administrative distance’, which is another
part of determining the best route to a destination.
Stick around to the end of today’s quiz
for a bonus question from Boson ExSim for
CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA,
and the ones I used when I studied for my
CCNA. If you want to get a copy of ExSim,
follow the link in the description.
Here is the network topology I’ll use for
the beginning of this demonstration. Four
routers, R1, R2, R3, and R4, and there is
a LAN connected to R4, 192.168.4.0/24. We’ll
be focusing mostly on R1’s perspective for
now. Without configuring any static routes
or dynamic routing protocol, R1’s routing
table looks like this, just connected and
local routes which were automatically added
when IP addresses were configured on its interfaces.
Let me take a minute to clarify a few points
on the exam topics list. These two routes
here, 10.0.12.0/30 and 10.0.13.0/30, are examples
of network routes. A network route is simply
a route to a network or subnet. In other words,
a route with a mask length less than /32.
For example, if we configure a static route
to 192.168.4.0/24, that’s a network route
also. It’s not a route to a single host,
but a route to a whole subnet. These two routes,
10.0.12.1/32 and 10.0.13.1/32, are examples
of host routes. A host route is a route to
a specific host, a single address, specified
with a /32 mask. These two routes here were
automatically added, and are host routes to the
specific addresses configured on R1’s G0/0
and G1/0 interfaces. To configure a static
route to a host, use IP ROUTE, followed by
the host’s address, then 255.255.255.255,
which is a /32 mask. Okay, that was just an
aside, so you understand those two terms.
Now let’s talk about dynamic routing.
Instead of configuring static routes on each
of these routers, we can enable a dynamic
routing protocol on them. Then, R4 will ‘advertise’
this 192.168.4.0/24 network to its neighbor,
R2, saying ‘you can reach this network via
me. R2 will add that route to its route table.
It will then advertise the same thing to R1,
telling R1 that it can reach 192.168.4.0/24
via R2. R1 will add this route to its route
table. Actually, if you look above that route,
you can see that R2 also advertised the 10.0.24.0/30
network, between R2 and R4, to R1, and R1
added it to its route table. R1 will then
in turn advertise to R3, telling R3 that it
can reach 192.168.4.0/24 via R1. It will also
advertise the 10.0.24.0/30 network that it
learned from R2, as well as the 10.0.12.0/30
network between R1 and R2, but we’re just
focusing on the one network for now.
How about if there is an error and R4’s
G0/0 interface goes down? The other routers
will automatically adapt and remove the route
from their route tables. As you can see, R1
has removed the route. This will prevent R1
from continuously sending traffic to a dead-end.
What if the same situation happened when using
static routing? I configured a static route
on R1. It can send traffic to R4’s network
with no problems. However, what if the same
failure on the link occurs? Because there
is no dynamic routing protocol in use, R1
is unaware that it can no longer reach the
192.168.4.0 network. If it receives packets
destined for that network, it will continue
forwarding them to R2, unaware that R2 can
no longer reach the network. Okay, so that’s
a benefit of dynamic routing, the router will
remove invalid routes. However, we really
should make sure there is a backup route,
so instead of totally removing the destination
network from the route table, it is replaced
with the next-best route.
So, I’ve added another connection between
R3 and R4. Now R1 has two valid paths to R4’s
internal network. via R2, and via R3. Let’s
check R1’s route table. You can see it still
has the route via R2 in its route table, as
it says via 10.0.12.2. In this case, what
will happen if I disable R4’s G0/0 interface
to simulate a failure?
So, I did that, and now let’s check R1’s
route table. As you can see, the route via
R2 was now automatically replaced with the
route via R3, it says via 10.0.13.2. So, we
lost the preferred route to 192.168.4.0, but
traffic can still follow this path. Now, you
may be wondering, why the route via R2 was
preferred over the route via R3? That’s
because this connection here is a fastethernet
connection, not gigabit ethernet. You’re
already familiar with the spanning-tree concept
of ‘root cost’, which is used to determine
the best path to the root bridge. Well, dynamic
routing protocols use a similar concept to
determine the best path to a destination.
R1 learned about the 192.168.4.0/24 network
from both R2 and R3, however it determined
that the path via R2 is superior because it
‘costs’ less.
Okay, so that’s a very quick introduction
to dynamic routing protocols, and their basic
purpose. Here are a few key points. Routers
can use dynamic routing protocols to advertise
information about their connected routes as
well as routes they have learned from other
devices. They form ‘adjacencies’ , also
know as ‘neighbor relationships’ or ‘neighborships’
with adjacent routers to exchange this information.
For example, in this network R1 will form
adjacencies with R2 and R3, its directly
connected neighbors. If multiple routes to
a destination are learned, the router determines
which route is superior and adds it to the
routing table. It uses the ‘metric’ of
the route to decide which is superior, and
the lower metric is superior. Just like in
spanning tree, the lower root cost is superior
when determining the root port on a switch.
I’ll talk more about metric later.
Now lets talk about the different types of
dynamic routing protocols. Dynamic routing
protocols can be divided into two main categories,
IGP, which stands for Interior Gateway Protocol,
and EGP, which stands for Exterior Gateway
Protocol. Let’s define those. IGPs are used
to share routes within a single autonomous
system, AS, which is a single organization,
for example a company. EGPs are used to share
routes between different autonomous systems.
Maybe this diagram will make it easier to
understand. Company A, Company B, ISP A, and
ISP B are each their own autonomous system,
AS. Within each organization, an IGP is used
to exchange routing information. However,
to exchange routing information between AS’s,
an EGP is used. The basic purpose of IGPs
and EGPs is the same, to share information
about routes to destinations. However they
function differently. Because this is a CCNA
course, we will focus mostly on OSPF, which
is an IGP, however you will also learn about
other IGPs and the one EGP that is in use
today, to the extent that you need to know
them for the exam.
Now let’s break down these categories further.
As I mentioned, the two big categories are
Interior Gateway Protocols, IGPs, and Exterior
Gateway Protocols, EGPs. However, you can
further break these categories down by the
‘algorithm type’. This refers to the processes
used by each protocol to share route information
and determine the best route to each destination.
There is only one type of EGP algorithm, Path
Vector. Not only is there only one type of
EGP algorithm, but there is only one EGP that
is used in modern networks. That is BGP, the
Border Gateway Protocol. Because it’s not
necessary for the CCNA, I won’t talk much
about BGP. I will mention a few important
things later, but beyond that you don’t
need to know BGP for the CCNA. Just make sure
you’re aware of the purpose of an EGP, to
share route information between autonomous
systems, and know that BGP is the only EGP
that is used in modern networks. So, you also
don’t need to know the details of how a
‘Path Vector’ algorithm functions. Now,
IGPs have two algorithm types, distance vector
and link state. I’ll repeat, when I say
‘algorithm’ I mean the processes each
protocol uses to share route information and
choose the best route to each destination.
All routing protocols have the same goal.
That is what I just said, to share route information
and select the best route to each destination.
However, the algorithm used to do so is different
for each routing protocol. There are two distance
vector protocols, RIP, the Routing Information
Protocol, and EIGRP, Enhanced Interior Gateway
Routing Protocol. I won’t cover these two
protocols in depth, although I will give you
a basic outline of their function so you can
compare and contrast them with OSPF. So, RIP
and EIGRP are the two distance vector protocols.
There are also two link state protocols. OSPF,
Open Shortest Path First, and IS-IS, Intermediate
System to Intermediate System. Like BGP, I
won’t talk about IS-IS much. If you want
to learn more about IS-IS, consider looking
into the CCNP Service Provider path after
the CCNA. OSPF, however, I will spend plenty
of time talking about over the next few videos.
For now, what I want you to remember is, first
of all, the names of each of these routing
protocols. Then remember which protocols use
which kind of algorithm. RIP and EIGRP use
a distance vector algorithm, OSPF and IS-IS
use a link state algorithm, and BGP uses a
path vector algorithm. The flashcards I provide
will be very helpful for this. Okay, now I
want to outline the characteristics of distance
vector and link state protocols.
I’ll start with distance vector routing
protocols. Once again, the distance vector
protocols we will learn about are RIP and
EIGRP. Distance vector protocols were invented
before link state protocols, in the early
1980s. Early examples of distance vector protocols
are RIP and Cisco’s proprietary protocol
IGRP, which was later updated to become EIGRP.
Distance vector protocols operate by sending
the following information to their directly
connected neighbors. their known destination
networks, and their metric to reach their
known destination networks. This method of
sharing route information is often called
‘routing by rumor’. Why the name? It’s
because the router doesn’t know about the
network beyond its neighbors. It only knows
the information that its neighbors tell it.
This is different than link state routing
protocols, in which the router develops a
more complete picture of the network. When
using a distance vector protocol, on the other
hand, all the router knows is the routes its
neighbors tells it about, and their metric
to reach those destinations. The reason for
the name ‘distance vector’ is because
the routers only learn the ‘distance’,
which is the metric, and the ‘vector’,
which is the direction to send the traffic, the
next-hop router, of each route. Basically,
distance vector protocols work by sharing
their route table, or parts of it, with their
neighbors.
So, the example I showed you before of R4
advertising its 192.168.4.0 network is an
example of distance vector logic. R4 tells
R2, its directly connected neighbor, ‘You
can reach 192.168.4.0/24 via me. My metric
to reach it is 1.’ Don’t worry about the
metric numbers yet, each routing protocol
uses a different type of metric and we will
cover those soon. Anyway, R2 doesn’t know
anything except that it can reach 192.168.4.0/24
via R4, and that R4’s metric is 1. Similarly,
R2 then tells R1 the same, except it advertises
the metric as 2. Once again, R1 doesn’t
have a detailed picture of the network, all
it knows is that it can reach 192.168.4.0/24
via R2, and that R2’s metric to reach it
is 2. And of course, R1 advertises the network
to R3, with its own metric to reach the destination
network. Once again, RIP and EIGRP are the
two distance vector routing protocols that
are used, and we will talk more about them
in day 25’s video.
Next I’ll briefly introduce link state routing
protocols. When using a link state routing
protocol, every router creates a ‘connectivity
map’ of the network. This map will be the
same on each router. To allow this, each router
advertises information about its interfaces,
its connected networks, to its neighbors.
These advertisements are passed along to other
routers, until all routers in the network
develop the same map of the network. Then,
each router independently uses this map to
calculate the best routes to each destination.
I think you can see how this is different
than the ‘routing by rumor’ of distance
vector protocols. In link state protocols,
each router gets a whole picture of the network
so that it can calculate the best routes.
Link state protocols use more resources, more
CPU power and memory, on the router, because
more information is shared. However, link
state protocols tend to be faster in reacting
to changes in the network than distance vector
protocols. The two link state protocols in
use today are OSPF and IS-IS. I will briefly
mention some things about IS-IS, but as for
OSPF, we will go very in depth.
Now let’s talk about those metrics that
I mentioned a few times. A router’s route
table contains the best route to each destination
network it knows about. If a router using
a dynamic routing protocol learns two different
routes to the same destination, how does it
determine which is ‘best’? As I briefly
mentioned before, It uses the metric value
of the routes to determine which is best.
A lower metric is considered better. It’s
like the root cost in spanning tree. A lower
root cost is considered superior, so the interface
with the lowest root cost will become the
root port. For dynamic routing protocols,
the route with the lowest metric is considered
best and will be entered in to the routing
table. Each routing protocol uses a different
metric to determine which route is the best.
Here in this slide I showed you before, although
R1 learns two paths to 192.168.4.0/24, one
via R2 and one via R3, only the route via
R2 is added to the routing table. This fastethernet
connection here has a higher metric cost than
the other gigabit ethernet connections, so
this route is less favorable. Now, you might
be wondering: What if this was also a gigabit
ethernet connection? Both routes would have
the same cost, so which route would be added
to the route table? Let’s see what happens.
I changed the connection between R3 and R4
to be a gigabit ethernet connection like the
others. Let’s check out R1’s route table.
So, BOTH routes have been added to the table.
via 10.0.13.2, which is R3, and via 10.0.12.2,
which is R2. So, if a router learns two (or
more) routes via the same routing protocol
to the same destination, with the same metric,
both will be added to the routing table. Traffic
will be load-balanced over both routes. Note
that they must be exactly the same destination,
the same network address and same prefix length.
Here’s a larger view. In this case both
routes were learned by the dynamic routing
protocol OSPF, as indicated by the code O
next to the routes. They are both to the exact
same destination, 192.168.4.0/24, and they
both have the same metric. The metric value
itself is also displayed in this output. Where
is it? It’s here, the second value in these
square brackets is the metric value of the
route. Both routes have a metric of 3, so
both were added, and traffic will be load-balanced
over both routes. This is called Equal Cost
MultiPath, or ECMP, load-balancing. Make sure
you remember this term, ECMP, it will come
up often in these videos about dynamic routing
protocols. As for these values on the left
side of the square brackets, this is another
important value called ‘administrative distance’,
or AD, which I will talk about a few slides
later. The OSPF protocol has an AD of 110.
Don’t memorize that now, as I said I’ll
talk about that again in a few slides.
Since I just showed you ECMP, equal cost multipath
load-balancing with a dynamic routing protocol,
I just want to let you know that you can do
the same with static routes as well. I disabled
OSPF on R1, and then configured two static
routes to 192.168.4.0, one via R2 and one
via R3. Then, both are added to the routing
table, and traffic will be load-balanced over
both routes. Notice that both routes have
a metric of 0. Static routes don’t really
use the concept of ‘metric’ so you’ll
always see 0 here. Notice also that the administrative
distance, AD, value of static routes is 1.
As I said, I’ll talk about what AD is in
a few slides. For now, let’s return back
to the topic of metric.
As I already mentioned, each routing protocol
uses a different metric. I will go into each
of these in more detail in later videos, but
here is a summary to introduce you to each.
RIP uses by far the simplest metric, hop count.
Each router in the path to the destination
counts as one ‘hop’, and the total metric
is the total number of hops to reach the destination.
One big downside is that links of all speeds
are equal, they all count as one hop. A 10
megabit per second ethernet link is one hop,
and a 10 gigabit per second link is one hop.
So, this is a very primitive way of calculating
metric, and is clearly not ideal. EIGRP uses
the most complicated metric of the IGPs, which
is a calculation based on bandwidth and delay
by default, however with configuration other
factors can be calculated as well. One thing
to note is that only the bandwidth of the
SLOWEST link in the route is used to calculate
the metric, but the total delay values of
all links in the path are used. This ‘delay’
value is a little misleading, since by default
it’s a value assigned to the interface based
on its bandwidth. Anyway, I’ll talk more
about this in the next video when we go in
more depth on EIGRP. Next up is OSPF, its
metric is called ‘cost’. The cost of each
link is calculated based on the bandwidth,
and the total bandwidth of the links in the
route make up the metric of the route. This
is a very simple way of calculating metric,
but also clearly better than RIP’s which
doesn’t take into account link speed. Finally,
IS-IS also uses a metric called ‘cost’.
However, the cost of each link is not automatically
calculated based on bandwidth. All links have
a cost of 10 by default. So, without any configuration,
it functions the same as RIP, being a simple
hop count metric. Okay, so IS-IS I won’t
talk about much, but these other three I will
give more detail about in future videos. For
now just remember the basics. RIP uses hop
count, EIGRP uses a calculation based on bandwidth
and delay, and OSPF uses a cost based on bandwidth.
The purpose of all of these metrics is the
same, to let the router select the best route
to the destination.
To briefly demonstrate how the difference
in metrics can affect which routes the router
selects, let’s look at this diagram again
from R1’s perspective, deciding which route
to 192.168.4.0/24 to select for its route
table. If it uses RIP, the metric is hop count.
Via R2, the hop count is 2. One hop to R2,
one hop to R4. Via R3, the hop count is also
2. One hop to R3, one hop to R4, even though
the connection from R3 to R4 is a slower,
fastethernet connection. So, both routes will
be put into R1’s route table, and R1 will
load balance traffic using both routes, even
though one route is slower. However, if OSPF
is used instead of RIP, which path will be
used? Unlike RIP, OSPF’s metric cost does
take into account bandwidth. So, the slower
connection between R3 and R4 will result in
a higher metric value, making it less favorable.
So, only this route will be entered into the
route table, and R1 will send all traffic
destined to the 192.168.4.0/24 network via
R2. RIP views both routes as equal, but OSPF
does not. Again, the purpose of all of these
metrics is the same, to let the router select
the best route to the destination, but some
routing protocols might make better decisions
than others.
Now let’s talk about administrative distance,
which I briefly mentioned earlier. In most
cases a company will only use a single IGP
for their network – usually OSPF, but sometimes
EIGRP if they only use Cisco equipment. However,
in some rare cases they might use two. For
example, if two companies connect their networks
to share information, two different routing
protocols might be in use. You might connect
a network running OSPF to a network running
EIGRP. Metric, which I just showed you, is
used to compare routes learned via the same
routing protocol. If a router learns two routes
to the same destination via OSPF, it uses
metric to choose which route is better. However,
different routing protocols use totally different
metrics, so they cannot be compared. For example,
an OSPF route to 192.168.4.0/24 might have
a metric of 30, while an EIGRP route to the
same destination might have a metric of 33280.
Which route is better? Which route should
the router put in the route table? We can’t
really answer those questions by looking at
the metrics, because OSPF and EIGRP use totally
different metrics. So, the administrative
distance, or AD, is used to determine which
routing protocol is preferred. A lower AD
is preferred, and indicates that the routing
protocol is considered more ‘trustworthy’,
meaning more likely to select good routes.
As you saw before, RIP’s hop count-based
metric system is not very good, so it has
a high AD, because it’s not as trustworthy.
It might say two routes are equal because
they have the same hop count, although really
one route is much worse because of lower bandwidth.
Ready for some memorization? These are the
administrative distances of most common types
of routes. I HIGHLY recommend you use the
flashcards to remember these. I would be surprised
if you don’t get a question on the exam
like ‘Two routes to the 10.0.0.0/24 network
are learned, one from OSPF and one from EIGRP.
Which route will be entered in the route table?’.
To answer that question, you would need to
know that EIGRP has a lower AD, so the EIGRP
route is preferred and will be entered in
the route table. Again, a lower AD number
is preferred, and will be selected over a
higher AD. Keep in mind that these are the
values used on Cisco devices, other vendors
might rank these differently. So, the most
preferred routes are those to directly connected
networks, they have an AD of 0. Static routes
are the next best, they have an AD of 1. Next
up are external BGP, also known as eBGP routes,
with an AD of 20. There is another kind of
BGP, internal BGP, iBGP, which you’ll see
later. EIGRP routes have an AD of 90. Next
is IGRP, the older version of EIGRP, with
an AD of 100. OSPF has an AD of 110. IS-IS
has an AD of 115, and RIP has an AD of 120.
So, of the IGPs I showed you, which are RIP,
EIGRP, OSPF, and IS-IS, EIGRP is the most
preferred, it has the lowest AD. However,
EIGRP external routes have a higher AD, 170.
These are beyond the scope of the CCNA, but
basically they are routes from outside of
the EIGRP network, that are then advertised
into EIGRP. Then internal BGP, iBGP, has an
AD of 200. Then one more. Routes with an AD
of 255 are unusable. Here’s a quote from
Cisco. If the administrative distance is 255,
the router does not believe the source of
that route and does not install the route
in the routing table. So, make sure you memorize
these. If you’re not using the flashcards,
I really think you should for things like
this. Without flashcards it might be difficult
to memorize these. But if you use the flashcards,
it’s quite easy.
Here’s a quick quiz question to demonstrate
a point. The following routes to the destination
network 10.1.1.0/24 are learned. A route with
a next hop of 192.168.1.1, learned via RIP,
with a metric of 5. A route with a next hop
of 192.168.2.1, learned via RIP, with a metric
of 3. And a route with a next hop of 192.168.3.1,
learned via OSPF, with a metric of 10. Which
route to 10.1.1.0/24 will be added to the
route table? Pause the video to think about
the answer. Okay, so the answer is the OSPF
route will be added to the route table. Metric
is used to compare routes learned from the
same routing protocol. However, before comparing
metrics, AD is used to select the best route.
The OSPF route will always take precedence
over the RIP routes, because it has a lower
AD.
Looking back at the route table I showed you
before, here you can see the AD of 1 for these
static routes. The connected and local routes
above them have an AD of 0, but it is not
displayed in the route table.
And another look at this route table with
OSPF routes. Here you can see the AD of 110.
Remember that the number on the left inside
the square brackets is the AD, and the number
on the right is the metric.
One final point before moving on to the quiz.
You can change the AD of a routing protocol,
and I will demonstrate this when we cover
OSPF configuration in a later video. If you
want OSPF routes to be preferred over EIGRP
routes, you can configure the router to do
that. You can also change the AD of a static
route. Notice here I used the standard command
to configure a static route. IP ROUTE, followed
by the destination, the subnet mask, and then
the next hop address. However, I used the
question mark to check for further options.
Here it says ‘distance metric’ for this
route. It includes the word ‘metric’,
but don’t confuse this for the metric we
talked about earlier. This is administrative
distance.
So, I configured the route with an AD of 100.
In the output of ‘show ip route’, you
can see that the AD is now 100, instead of
the default 1 for a normal static route. Now,
why would you want to do this?
By changing the AD of a static route, you
can make it less preferred than routes learned
by a dynamic routing protocol to the same
destination. But, you have to make sure that
the static route’s AD is higher than the
routing protocol’s AD, or else the static
route will still be preferred. This kind of
static route is called a ‘floating static
route’. The route will be inactive, meaning
it won’t be in the routing table, unless
the route learned by the dynamic routing protocol
is removed. For example, maybe the remote
router stops advertising it for some reason,
or an interface failure causes an adjacency
with a neighbor to be lost. You can see here
that floating static routes are part of the
exam topics list. Make sure to watch the lab
videos and download my packet tracer labs
to get practice configuring everything we
cover.
Okay, so let’s quickly review what we covered
in today’s video. I gave you a brief introduction
to dynamic routing protocols. They allow routers
to automatically learn routes to different
destinations without having to manually configure
static routes. Static routes are useful, but
in large networks it’s not practical to
use only static routes, you would have to
configure thousands of different routes, which
is not a good strategy. We covered the different
types of dynamic routing protocols. First,
the big two categories are IGPs, interior
gateway protocols, used for routing within
an organization. Then there are EGPs, exterior
gateway protocols, used for routing between
organizations, for example over the Internet.
The only EGP in use these days is BGP. We
can also categorize routing protocols by the
kind of algorithm they use. There is one type
of EGP algorithm, that is path vector. However
there are two different kinds of IGP algorithms.
Distance vector, used by RIP and EIGRP. Also
link state, used by OSPF and IS-IS. Then we
talked about metrics. Each routing protocol
uses a different metric, which is a value
used to determine the best route to a destination,
within the same routing protocol. However,
how do you compare different routing protocols?
With administrative distance. Use the flashcards
to remember the AD of each kind of route and
routing protocol, I’m sure you’ll need
it for the test. I introduced a lot of topics
in this video, so I want to say that you shouldn’t
be worried if you feel you don’t understand
completely yet. In the next video I will cover
RIP and EIGRP, and then the next two or three
videos after that will cover OSPF. In those
videos we will review all of these fundamental
topics again, such as administrative distance
and metric.
Okay let’s move on to today’s quiz. At
the end of the quiz there will be a bonus
question from Boson ExSim, the best practice
exams for the CCNA. If you’re preparing
for the CCNA exam and you want to make sure
you’re really ready, Boson ExSim is, in
my opinion, the single best thing you can
get to prepare yourself for the real exam.
Follow the link in the description to get
Boson ExSIm.
Here’s quiz question 1. R1 learns four routes
to 192.168.1.0/24 through multiple routing
protocols: RIP, EIGRP, OSPF, and IS-IS. Which
route/routes will be added to the route table?
A, the RIP route only. B, the EIGRP route
only. C, the OSPF route only. D, the IS-IS
route only. E, the RIP and EIGRP routes, because
both are distance vector protocols. F, OSPF
and IS-IS, because both are link state protocols.
Or G, all routes will be added to the routing
table. Pause the video to think about your
answer.
The answer is B, only the EIGRP route will be added to the routing table. Why is
this? When selecting which route to a certain
destination to add to the routing table, and
routes are learned from multiple routing protocols,
the AD is used to determine which will be
added to the routing table. EIGRP has the
lowest AD of the four protocols, so only the
EIGRP route will be added to the routing table.
Let’s go to question 2.
Which type of routing protocol is also known
as ‘routing by rumor’? A, link state.
B, path vector. C, distance vector. Or D,
interior gateway. Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, distance
vector. Distance vector protocols such as
RIP and EIGRP operate by telling neighboring
routers which routes they know, and their
metrics to reach those networks, this is known
as ‘routing by rumor’. A is incorrect
because, when using a link state protocol
such as IS-IS or OSPF, each router develops
a complete map of the network to calculate
the best routes, which is different than the
minimal information a router receives from
neighbors when using a distance vector protocol.
B, path vector, is a type of EGP, exterior
gateway protocol. It’s not covered in the
current CCNA, and operates differently than
distance vector. D, interior gateway protocols,
or IGP, is a category which includes both
distance vector AND link state protocols,
so it is incorrect. Let’s go to question
3.
R1 learns two routes to 172.16.0.0/16 via
RIP, one via 10.0.0.1 and the other via 10.1.0.1.
Both routes are 5 hops away. Which route/routes
will be entered into the routing table? A,
both routes. B, only the route via 10.0.0.1.
C, only the route via 10.1.0.1. Or D, neither
route will be added because RIP’s AD value
is too high. Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is A, both routes
will be added to the route table. Both routes
are to the same destination, 172.16.0.0/16.
They were learned through the same protocol,
RIP. And they have the same metric, 5. So,
because of these conditions, both will be
added to the routing table and R1 will load-balance
traffic over the two routes. As for option
D, if R1 also learned a route to 172.16.0.0/16
via another routing protocol such as OSPF,
this would be true, because RIP’s AD value
is higher than OSPF, so it is less preferred.
However, there was no mention of another routing
protocol, so D is incorrect. Okay, now let’s
take a look at a bonus question from Boson
ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson ExSim practice question
I got another question that I really like,
it's a good question about route selection.
Let's get right into it. You issue the SHOW
IP ROUTE command on RouterA and receive the
following partial output. So, we are shown
four routes, S R D O. S is a static route,
R is learned via RIP, D is learned via EIGRP.
That's right, its D, not E. And O is OSPF.
So, they are to four different destinations.
All of them begin '10.20.0.0', but they have
different prefix lengths, so these all count
as different destinations. The static route
is /22, /24, /26, /28. So these are not the
same destination. So that's why, even though
the static route has the lowest AD, it's the
most preferred, all of the routes appear in
the routing table. Not just the static route.
So, RouterA receives a packet that is destined
for 10.20.0.14. Which of the following routes
will RouterA use to send the packet? Select
the best answer. So, A, the RIP route because
it has the highest administrative distance.
B, the OSPF route because it is the route
with the longest prefix match. C, the static
route because static routes are preferred
over dynamic routes. Or D, the EIGRP route
because it has the lowest administrative distance.
Okay, pause the video here to think about
your answer. Okay, so let's check the answer.
So, in today's video I just talked about metric
and administrative distance. So, if you receive
routes from multiple routing protocols to
the same destination, you use the administrative
distance to select the route. But if you get
multiple routes from the same routing protocol,
you use the metric. However, these routes
are not to the same destination. These are
different destinations, as I just said, because
the prefix lengths are different. So, these
AD and metric numbers are irrelevant. So,
what did I tell you in, I believe it was Day
11's video about static routes? How does the
router decide which route to use? If this
destination matches multiple entries in the
routing table. And this destination does match
all of these entries, so it could use any
route. Which one does it use? It uses the
most specific match. And 'most specific' means
the longest prefix. So that is /28, so it
should use this OSPF route and send the packet
to 192.168.10.1 out of its Serial0/1 interface.
So, I think B, 'the OSPF route because it
is the route with the longest prefix match',
is the correct answer. Let's check. And it
is. So, if you didn't quite understand my
explanation, here is Boson's explanation.
You can pause the video here to read it. This
is the great thing about Boson ExSim, is it
gives you in-detail explanations. Not just
why B is correct, but also why A, C, and D
are incorrect. And after that there is a reference
to some Cisco documentation, which is freely
available on the Internet, 'Route selection
in Cisco routers'. Okay, so that was today's
Boson ExSim practice question. If you want
to get a copy of ExSim, please follow the
link in the video description. These are the
exams I used when I studied for my CCNA and
CCNP exams and I really think they helped
me pass all of my exams on the first try.
So once again, if you want to get a copy of
ExSim, please follow the link in the video
description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video. There is a flashcard deck to use with
the software ‘Anki’. There will also be
a packet tracer practice lab so you can get
some hands-on practice. That will be in the
next video. Sign up for my mailing list via
the link in the description, and I’ll send
you all of the flashcards and packet tracer
lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members. Thank
you to John, funnydart, Joshua, Scott, Aleksa,
Hassan, Gerrard, Tibi, Vikram, Joyce, Marek,
Samil, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel,
Yousif, Kone, Boson Software, the creators
of ExSim, Sidi, Magrathea, Devin, Charlsetta,
Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksander, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support. One
of you is still displaying as Channel failed
to load, if this is you please let me know
and I’ll see if YouTube can fix it. This
is the list of JCNP-level members at the time
of recording by the way, June 13th 2020, if
you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching. Please subscribe to
the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA. If you want to leave a tip,
check the links in the description. I'm also
a Brave verified publisher and accept BAT,
or Basic Attention Token, tips via the Brave
browser. That's all for now.