Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will take a look at two dynamic
routing protocols that aren’t actually in
the exam topics list, RIP and EIGRP.
So, why am I covering these two topics even
though they aren’t on the official exam
topics list?
Well, the main reason is that you might still
get a few questions about RIP or EIGRP on
the exam, so it’s best to be prepared.
Cisco’s exam topics list states this: ‘The
following topics are general guidelines for
the content likely to be included on the exam.
However, other related topics may also appear
on any specific delivery of the exam.’
So, don’t think that just because something
isn’t on the exam topics list, you don’t
have to know anything about it.
Of course, we won’t study RIP and EIGRP
to the same level of depth that we will study
OSPF, which is explicitly listed on the exam
topics list, but I’ll use this video to
give an overview of both of RIP and EIGRP.
I will show some basic configurations for
both, but just the minimum you need to get
an understanding of how they work, you don’t
need to memorize them for the exam.
A lot of the things you learn in this video
can also be applied to OSPF, so this should
make things easier when I introduce OSPF in
Day 26.
So, what exactly will we cover today?
Just as I said, RIP, the Routing Information
Protocol, and EIGRP, the Enhanced Interior
Gateway Routing Protocol.
Stick around to the end of today’s quiz
for a bonus question from Boson ExSim for
CCNA, a set of practice exams for the CCNA
by Boson Software.
These are the practice exams I used to prepare
for my CCNA a couple years ago, and they are
very popular among people getting ready to
take their CCNA.
If you’re planning to take your CCNA soon
and want to make absolutely sure you’re
ready, ExSim is in my opinion the best tool
you can use.
If you want to get Boson ExSim, follow the
link in the video description.
So let’s get right into RIP.
Some of this stuff I already talked about
last video, but let’s review.
RIP stands for Routing Information Protocol,
and it is an industry standard protocol, not
Cisco proprietary.
It is a distance vector interior gateway protocol,
so it uses ‘routing-by-rumour’ logic to
learn and share routes.
Watch day 24 again if you want a review of
that.
RIP uses hop count as its metric, each router
in the path to the destination counts as one
‘hop’, and the bandwidth is irrelevant.
A 10 gigabit connection counts as one hop,
and a 10 megabit connection also counts as
one hop.
And something I didn’t mention last video,
the maximum hop count is 15.
Anything more than that is considered unreachable,
and RIP will not insert the route into the
routing table.
So, clearly RIP cannot be used for very large
networks.
Actually, RIP is almost never used in real
networks, but it can possibly be used in small
networks, and also in lab environments, as
a simple IGP that is quick and easy to set
up.
RIP has three versions, RIP version 1 and
version 2, which are used for IPv4.
There is also RIPng, RIP Next Generation,
which is used for IPv6, but which we won’t
cover in this course.
RIP uses two message types to learn and share
routing information.
The first is the Request message, which asks
RIP-enabled neighbor routers to send their
routing table.
The second is the response message, which
is used to send the local router’s routing
table to neighboring routers.
By default, RIP-enabled routers will share
their routing table every 30 seconds.
This can cause problems in networks with lots
of routers, as these regular updates can clog
up the network.
Next up, let’s compare RIPv1 and RIPv2.
RIPv1 is a very old protocol.
Basically, if you’re going to use RIP, don’t
use version 1.
RIPv1 only advertises classful addresses,
meaning Class A, Class B, and Class C. I taught
you about classful addressing because it’s
important to understand, but in modern networks
the concept is no longer used.
Because version 1 only supports classful addresses,
it doesn’t support things like VLSM and
CIDR, which I covered in my subnetting videos.
In fact, when RIPv1 advertises a network to
a neighbor, it doesn’t even include the
subnet mask information in the advertisement.
If the advertised network is in the class
A range, it is assumed to be /8.
It it’s in the class B range, it’s assumed
to be /16.
If it’s in the class C range, it’s assumed
to be /24.
Here are some examples of subnets, and how
RIPv1 would force them to become classful
networks.
10.1.1.0/24 will become 10.0.0.0, a class
A network.
172.16.192.0/18 will become 172.16.0.0, a
class B network.
And 192.168.1.4/30 will become 192.168.1.0,
a class C network.
This is simply not acceptable in modern networks
where IPv4 address classes are no longer used
and have been replaced with CIDR and VLSM.
We need the ability to use subnets, not just
the classful networks.
Okay, one more thing about RIPv1, its messages
are broadcast to the IP address 255.255.255.255,
so all routers on the local segment will receive
the messages.
Next up, let’s look at RIP version 2, which
improves upon version 1 in a few ways.
First of all, it supports VLSM and CIDR, it
doesn’t have to be classful like version
1.
To support this, it includes subnet mask information
in its route advertisements.
A /30 network will advertised as /30, for
example.
Another difference is that RIPv2 messages
are not broadcast, they are multicast to address
224.0.0.9.
This address is in the class D range, which
is reserved for multicast addresses.
What exactly is multicast?
You don’t need to know the details at the
CCNA level, but here’s a quick comparison.
Broadcast messages are delivered to all devices
on the local network, as you have seen many
times in this course.
Multicast messages, on the other hand, are
only received by devices that have joined
that specific multicast group.
Just know that basic difference between broadcast
and multicast, and you’ll be good.
It’s only at the CCIE level that you need
to go really in depth on the topic of multicast.
Okay, so now I’m going to introduce you
to the basic configuration of RIP.
Although RIP configuration is not actually
on the CCNA, I want to introduce it for a
couple reasons.
First, RIP configuration is very simple, so
it acts as a good introduction to dynamic
routing configuration.
Second, some of the mechanics are similar
to how OSPF configuration works, so it will
make it easier when we go in depth on OSPF
later.
So, assuming all of the other routers have
already been set up with RIP, let’s just
configure R1.
Here is the basic setup.
First, enter RIP configuration mode with the
command ROUTER RIP.
You can see under that the prompt now says
‘config-router’ instead of just ‘config’.
Next, configure the router to use RIP version
2 with the command VERSION 2.
This isn’t necessary, but you should always
use version 2 if you’re going to use RIP.
Classful IPv4 addressing is a thing of the
past, in modern networks we need to be able
to use things like VLSM and CIDR.
Then, use the command NO AUTO-SUMMARY.
Auto-summary is on by default, and it automatically
converts the networks the router advertises
to classful networks.
For example, using classful logic, the 172.16.1.0/28
network attached to R1 is a class B network,
so it would be advertised as 172.16.0.0/16.
Always use these two commands when you configure
RIP, VERSION 2, followed by NO AUTO-SUMMARY.
Next up we have to use the NETWORK command.
First I used NETWORK 10.0.0.0.
Now, I have to explain some things about it.
The command itself is classful, it will automatically
convert to classful networks.
For example, even if you enter the command
NETWORK 10.0.12.0, it will be converted to
10.0.0.0.
10.0.12.0 falls in the class A range, so a
/8 prefix length is assumed.
So, after the first 8 bits, all of the other
bits will be converted to 0.
Because of this behavior, there is no need
to enter a network mask.
Okay, so what effect does this command actually
have?
R1’s G0/0 interface is 10.0.12.0/30, and
its G1/0 interface is 10.0.13.0/30, but
I just entered the command NETWORK 10.0.0.0.
Let’s look at exactly how the NETWORK command
functions.
The NETWORK command tells the router to look
for interfaces with an IP address that is
in the specified range, that is the range
specified in the NETWORK command.
Then it will activate RIP on the interface
or interfaces that fall in the range.
It will form adjacencies with other connected
RIP-enabled neighbors, and advertise the network
prefix of the interface.
This is not necessarily the prefix you specified
in the network command.
This is also how the EIGRP and OSPF NETWORK
commands operate, although there are a few
differences.
So, let me walk through it step-by-step here,
it will make it easier to pick up EIGRP and
OSPF later.
So, we’ve just entered the network 10.0.0.0
command on R1.
Because the NETWORK command is classful, 10.0.0.0
is assumed to be 10.0.0.0/8.
R1 will look for any interfaces with an IP
address that matches 10.0.0.0/8.
/8 means that only the first 8 bits need
to match, so the first octet of the IP address
needs to be the same.
10.0.12.1 and 10.0.13.1 both match, they both
have the same first octet of 10.
So, RIP is activated on G0/0 and G1/0.
R1 then forms adjacencies with its neighbors
R2 and R3.
R1 will send and receive route information
to and from R2 and R3.
Here’s the important part, R1 advertises
10.0.12.0/30 and 10.0.13.0/30, the network
prefixes of its G0/0 and G1/0 interfaces,
to its RIP neighbors, R2 and R3.
Even though we used the NETWORK 10.0.0.0 command,
R1 doesn’t advertise the 10.0.0.0/8 network.
The NETWORK command doesn’t tell the router
which networks to advertise.
It tells the router which interfaces to activate
RIP on, and then the router will advertise
the network prefix of those interfaces.
Okay, we also configured the NETWORK 172.16.0.0
command.
Let’s run through this as well.
Because the network command is classful, 172.16.0.0
is assumed to be 172.16.0.0/16.
R1 will look for any interfaces with an IP
address that matches 172.16.0.0/16.
172.16.1.14 matches, so R1 will activate RIP
on G2/0.
This time there are no RIP neighbors connected
to G2/0, so no new adjacencies are formed.
However, R1 advertises 172.16.1.0/28 (NOT
172.16.0.0/16) to its RIP neighbors.
One more important point: Although there are
no RIP neighbors connected to G2/0, R1 will
continuously send RIP advertisements out of
G2/0.
This is unnecessary traffic, so G2/0 should
be configured as a passive interface.
Let’s see how to do that.
I used the command PASSIVE-INTERFACE G2/0.
This configures G2/0 as a passive interface.
Note that the command is done from RIP configuration
mode, not directly on the interface itself.
That’s why you need to specify the interface
in the command.
The passive-interface command tells the router
to stop sending RIP advertisements out of
the specified interface, which is G2/0 in
this case.
However, the router will continue to advertise
the network prefix of the interface, which
is 172.16.1.0/28, to its RIP neighbors, R2
and R3.
It is recommended that you always use this
command on interfaces which don’t have any
RIP neighbors.
EIGRP and OSPF both have the same passive
interface functionality, using the same command.
To demonstrate one more function of RIP I
added an Internet connection to R1, via it’s
G3/0 interface.
Then I configured a default route pointing
to the Internet.
So, any packets that don’t match any of
the other entries in R1’s routing table
will be sent to the Internet.
Here you can see it in the routing table.
Gateway of last resort is 203.0.113.2 to network
0.0.0.0.
Under it you can see the configured static
route to 0.0.0.0/0.
Now, I want to use RIP to tell R2, R3, and
R4 about this default route so that they can
reach the Internet as well.
The command to share this default route into
RIP is DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE, again
the command is done from RIP configuration
mode.
Now that I have entered this command, R1 will
advertise the route to R2 and R3, and they
will then advertise it to R4.
Let’s just check the routing table of R4.
Notice it says ‘Gateway of last resort is
10.0.34.1 to network 0.0.0.0’, however below
that you can see two routes, one via F2/0
to R3 and one via G0/0 to R2.
Only one is actually stated up top as being
the gateway of last resort, but because both
of these routes have the same hop-count, R4
will load-balance traffic over the two routes.
I’m repeating myself, but RIP treats all
connections equally, as one hop, so even though
the connection via R3 is a slower fastethernet
connection, RIP considers it equal to the
faster gigabit ethernet connection via R2.
OSPF also has the same DEFAULT-INFORMATION
ORIGINATE command, by the way, to share a
default route with neighbors.
We’ll take a look at it again when we learn
about OSPF.
Now let’s take a look at a very useful SHOW
command, SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
This command can be used for RIP, EIGRP, and
OSPF, to check various stats.
We’ll just run through a few of the things
you need to know.
First up, this part here identifies the protocol
that is being used, RIP in this case.
These are some timers that RIP uses to operate,
we won’t talk about them for RIP or EIGRP,
but will go in depth when we study OSPF.
Here is some information about the version
being used, notice that it’s version 2 as
we configured.
Automatic network summarization is not in
effect, this is because we used the NO AUTO-SUMMARY
command earlier.
Maximum paths is 4, this refers to ECMP load-balancing.
By default, RIP will insert up to 4 paths
to the same destination into the routing table
if they have the same metric.
However, this can be changed.
Here is the command, MAXIMUM-PATHS, followed
by a number, 1 to 32.
This is done from RIP configuration mode.
I put in 8 for example.
This command is the same for EIGRP and OSPF
also, by the way.
Next up, this section here shows the networks
we entered with the NETWORK command.
Once again, these aren’t the actual networks
RIP is advertising, the network command just
identifies which interfaces to activate RIP
on.
Here you can see any passive interfaces listed,
just G2/0 in this case.
Under ‘routing information sources’ you
can see R1’s RIP neighbors, 10.0.12.2 which
is R2 and 10.0.13.2 which is R3.
Finally, distance states the administrative
distance of RIP, which is currently the default
of 120.
This can be changed with this command from
RIP configuration mode, DISTANCE, followed
by a number, 1 to 255.
For example, if you want to make RIP routes
preferred over EIGRP routes for some reason,
you could set it to 85 like I just did, to
make RIP’s AD lower than EIGRP’s AD of
90.
The DISTANCE command is the same for EIGRP
and OSPF also, by the way.
Okay, that’s all for RIP.
Let’s move on to EIGRP, you’ll see a lot
of things are similar to RIP.
EIGRP stands for Enhanced Interior Gateway
Routing Protocol.
It is an improved version of the older IGRP,
Interior Gateway Routing Protocol.
EIGRP was Cisco proprietary, but Cisco has
now published it openly so other vendors can
implement it on their equipment.
However, my understanding is that Cisco didn’t
open up the entire protocol, parts of it remain
Cisco-proprietary, and I don’t think many
vendors have bothered implementing EIGRP.
So, practically speaking, it’s still considered
a Cisco-only protocol.
It’s considered an ‘advanced’ or ‘hybrid’
distance vector routing protocol.
It improves on the very basic operations of
RIP, its fellow distance vector routing protocol.
It’s much faster than RIP in reacting to
changes in the network.
It doesn’t have the 15 ‘hop-count’ limit
of RIP, so it supports very large networks.
It sends messages using the multicast address
224.0.0.10.
Remember, RIPv1 broadcasts messages, and RIPv2
multicasts them to 224.0.0.9.
EIGRP multicasts them to 224.0.0.10.
Try to remember these multicast addresses,
they could come up as exam questions.
Finally, one unique feature of EIGRP, EIGRP
is the only IGP that can perform unequal-cost
load-balancing.
By default it performs ECMP load-balancing
over 4 paths like RIP, but you can configure
it to load-balance over multiple paths that
don’t have equal cost.
EIGRP will even load-balance them in proportion
to their bandwidth.
So, more traffic will be sent over paths with
a lower-metric, since they are faster, and
less traffic will be sent over paths with
a higher metric, since they are the slower
paths.
EIGRP is a great protocol, but because its
use is mostly limited only to Cisco devices,
it’s not used nearly as much as OSPF is.
That’s why Cisco made OSPF the main focus
of the new CCNA when it comes to dynamic routing
protocols.
Okay, let’s look at the basic configurations
of EIGRP.
Here’s the same network as before.
I’ve removed the RIP configurations, although
you can have both RIP and EIGRP running at
the same time.
But that would just be a waste of resources
on the routers, so usually there will just
be one IGP running on a router.
So, enter EIGRP configuration mode with this
command, ROUTER EIGRP, followed by an AS,
autonomous system, number.
I used 1.
The AS number must match between routers or
they will not form an adjacency and share
route information.
I already configured the same AS number of
1 on R2, 3, and 4, so I had to configure the
same here on R1.
Next I disabled auto-summary.
It functions the same as in RIP, it will advertise
classful networks instead of the actual network
prefix configured on its interfaces.
Auto-summary might be enabled or disabled
by default, depending on the router or VIOS version.
If it’s enabled, disable it.
Actually on the version I’m using here it
is already disabled by default, but I just
wanted to show you that EIGRP also has the
auto-summary feature like RIP, and that you
should make sure it’s turned off.
Then I used the same passive-interface command
as I did for RIP.
Next up I used the NETWORK 10.0.0.0 command
to activate EIGRP on the G0/0 and G1/0 interfaces.
You can use a mask with EIGRP’s NETWORK
command, however it will assume a classful
address if you don’t specify the mask.
So, NETWORK 10.0.0.0 is assumed to be 10.0.0.0/8.
This network command functions like RIP’s.
You aren’t actually telling the router to
advertise the 10.0.0.0/8 network.
You are telling it to activate EIGRP on interfaces
with an IP address that falls in the 10.0.0.0/8
range, so any IP address that begins with
10.
That includes G0/0 and G1/0, so EIGRP is activated
on both interfaces.
If you specify the mask, it looks like this.
This command here, NETWORK 172.16.1.0 0.0.0.15
activates EIGRP on the G2/0 interface.
If this is your first time learning this,
you’re probably a little confused right
now.
What’s 0.0.0.15?
Isn’t the subnet mask for a /28 prefix 255.255.255.240?
Well, yes it is.
But EIGRP uses a ‘wildcard mask’ instead
of a regular subnet mask.
Let me explain what exactly that means.
A wildcard mask is basically an ‘inverted’
subnet mask.
All 1s in the subnet mask are 0 in the equivalent
wildcard mask, and all 0s in the subnet mask
are 1 in the equivalent wildcard mask.
Let’s take a look.
Here’s a subnet mask in binary.
255.255.255.0 in dotted decimal.
If you invert all of the bits, you get this.
0.0.0.255 in dotted decimal.
So, that’s the wildcard mask equivalent
of /24, 0.0.0.255.
Notice all of the 1s in the subnet mask have
become 0, and the 0s in the subnet mask have
become 1.
Here’s another example.
255.255.0.0 becomes 0.0.255.255.
This is the wildcard mask equivalent of /16.
And here’s another, 255.0.0.0 becomes 0.255.255.255.
This is the wildcard mask equivalent of /8.
Okay, so those are easy, now let’s look
at something a little more challenging.
In our network, R1’s G2/0 interface has
a /28 prefix length, 255.255.255.240 written
as a normal subnet mask in dotted decimal.
If you invert the bits, you get this.
If you write that out in dotted decimal, you
get 0.0.0.15.
So, that’s how you write a /28 prefix length
using a wildcard mask.
Let’s do a few more practice questions.
Pause the video now and convert this into
a wildcard mask.
Okay, here’s the answer, 0.0.0.127, that’s
a /25 prefix length.
Let’s try another.
Pause the video now and convert this subnet
mask into a wildcard mask.
Okay, here’s the answer.
0.3.255.255.
That’s how you write a /14 prefix length
as a wildcard mask.
Let’s do one more for now.
Pause the video now and convert this subnet
mask into a wildcard mask.
Okay, here’s the answer.
0.0.31.255, which is a /19 prefix length written
as a wildcard mask.
Although I think it’s always important to
understand the binary underneath all of it,
a good shorcut is to subtract each octet of
the subnet mask from 255.
So, with this subnet mask, for example, 255
minus 255 equals 0.
255 minus 255 equals 0.
255 minus 248 equals 7. and 255 minus 0 equals
255.
So, this /21 subnet mask becomes 0.0.7.255
when written using a wildcard mask.
To finish up with wildcard masks, I’ll explain
a little bit more about their function.
A ‘0’ in the wildcard mask means the bits
must match, between the interface’s IP address
and the EIGRP network command.
A ‘1’ in the wildcard mask means the bits
don’t have to match.
So, the IP address on R1’s G2/0 is 172.16.1.14.
I used the EIGRP network command 172.16.1.0,
with the following wildcard mask: 0.0.0.15.
This means that the first 28 bits must match.
Do they?
Yes they do.
So, we have a match, and EIGRP will be activated
on the interface.
Let’s try another one, see if it will match.
With the same IP address, I used this network
command.
Network 172.16.1.0, with a wildcard mask of
0.0.0.7.
So, this means the first 29 bits must match.
Do they?
Actually, they don’t.
This bit here doesn’t match between R1’s
G2/0 interface and the NETWORK command.
So, no match, and EIGRP will not be activated
on the interface.
Okay, try to figure this out on your own.
With the command NETWORK 172.16.1.8 0.0.0.7,
would EIGRP be activated on the interface?
Pause the video now to find the answer.
Okay, let’s check.
We’re using the same wildcard mask as last
time, so the first 29 bits have to match.
Do they match this time?
Yes they do, the first 29 bits of 172.16.1.14
and the first 29 bits of 172.16.1.8 match.
So, we have a match and EIGRP will be activated
on the interface.
Okay, one last practice question for wildcard
masks.
The network command is NETWORK 168.0.0.0 7.255.255.255.
In this case, would EIGRP be activated on
the interface?
Pause the video now to find the answer.
Okay, let’s check.
With this wildcard mask, only the first 5
bits need to match between the interface IP
address and the EIGRP network command.
The first five bits of the IP address are
1 0 1 0 1, and the first five bits of the
network command are 1 0 1 0 1 as well, so
we once again have a match, and EIGRP will
be activated on the interface.
So, in this case I used a /28 wildcard mask,
the same prefix length of the network G2/0
is connected to, but as I just demonstrated
you can use a variety of wildcard masks to
activate EIGRP on the interface.
However, usually you’ll just keep it simple
and use the same prefix length as the interface
itself, like I did here.
Or maybe use a /32 wildcard mask and specify
the exact IP address on the interface.
How would you write a /32 wildcard mask?
Well, as you know the subnet mask is 255.255.255.255,
so the wildcard mask would be all 0s, 0.0.0.0.
Anyway, OSPF uses wildcard masks also so we’ll
review them again in a future video.
Just remember, this command only specifies
which interface or interfaces to activate
EIGRP on.
R1 will then advertise the network prefix
on that interface, 172.16.1.0/28 in this case.
Let’s take a look at the SHOW IP PROTOCOLS
command when EIGRP is running.
‘Routing protocol is EIGRP 1’, 1 being
the AS number we configured of course.
Remember what I said in the previous video
about EIGRP’s metric?
It uses interface bandwidth and delay by default,
those are the ‘K1’ and ‘K3’ values
that are set to 1 here.
The bandwidth of the SLOWEST link in the path,
plus the sum of the delay values of all the
links in the path, are used to calculate the
metric.
The other k-values, K2, K4, and K5 are set
to 0 by default and are not used to calculate
metric, however that can be changed with configuration.
Next up is the router-ID.
In EIGRP and OSPF, the router has a unique
router ID which identifies it within the AS.
Notice that the default on R1 is 172.16.1.14.
Why is that?
Well, the router ID is determined like this.
First up, if the router ID is manually configured,
that will be the router ID.
If the router ID isn’t manually configured,
the highest IP address on any of the router’s
loopback interfaces will be the router ID.
Loopback interfaces are virtual interfaces
inside the router, I’ll talk about them
more in the OSPF videos.
Finally, if there are no loopback interfaces
configured, as is the case here, the highest
IP address on any of the router’s physical
interfaces will become the router ID.
So, G2/0’s 172.16.1.14 became the router
ID.
Note that the router ID isn’t actually an
IP address, it’s just a 32-bit number formatted
like a dotted-decimal IP address, and you
can change it to any 32 bit number.
Here’s how to configure the EIGRP router-ID.
From EIGRP configuration mode, use the command
EIGRP ROUTER-ID, followed by the router ID
you want to configure, in this case I used
1.1.1.1.
Now you can see that the router ID changes
to 1.1.1.1, since manual configuration takes
highest priority.
Okay, next two fields we saw when learning
about RIP.
Automatic summarization is disabled, as it
should be, and EIGRP also performs ECMP load-balancing
over a maximum of 4 paths by default, like
RIP.
Routing for networks 10.0.0.0 and 172.16.1.0/28.
These are the two NETWORK commands we entered
earlier.
G2/0 is configured as a passive interface,
there are two neighbors, R2 and R3, and EIGRP
has two separate AD values, 90 for internal
routes and 170 for external.
Remember both numbers.
Internal routes are normal EIGRP routes, but
external routes are routes from outside EIGRP
which are then inserted into EIGRP, but that’s
a more advanced topic for the CCNP level.
Finally I want to show you how EIGRP looks
in the routing table.
First, notice that EIGRP routes are indicated
with the letter D, not E. Also, check out
the metric costs.
3072, 3328, 28416, these costs are much higher
than you see in OSPF and RIP, and this is
a very small network.
In large networks, these numbers can get much
larger.
That’s perhaps a downside of EIGRP, the
metrics are harder to understand.
Okay, that’s all we’ll cover about RIP
and EIGRP in this video.
Before moving on to today’s quiz, let’s
review what we covered in this video.
First, we covered the basics of RIP and its
configuration.
Then we did the same for EIGRP.
Again, these aren’t listed on the exam topics
list, but that doesn’t mean you don’t
need to know anything about them.
Also, the things you learned in this video
will make learning OSPF in the next few videos
much easier.
There is one more thing about EIGRP I want
to talk about, its unequal cost load balancing,
but I will cover that in the lab video.
So be sure to watch that video, it’s coming
next.
Also make sure to stick around until the end
of today’s quiz for a bonus question from
Boson ExSim, the best practice exams for the
CCNA, CCNP, as well as other IT exams.
Follow the link in the description to get
a copy of ExSim for yourself, in my opinion
it’s the single best tool to make sure you’re
ready for the real CCNA exam.
Okay, let’s move on to question 1 of the
quiz.
R1 and R2 both use RIP to share routes.
R1 has a default route to the Internet that
you want to advertise to R2.
Which command should you use?
A, from config-router mode on R1, DEFAULT-INFORMATION
ORIGINATE.
B, from config-router mode on R1, NETWORK
203.0.113.0.
C, from global config mode on R2, IP ROUTE
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 10.0.12.1.
D, from config-router mode on R2, DEFAULT-INFORMATION
ORIGINATE.
Pause the video to think about the answer.
The answer is A, default-information originate
on R1.
This command is used to advertise R1’s default
route to its RIP neighbors.
B, the NETWORK command, is used to activate
RIP on an interface, not to advertise a default
route.
C, the IP ROUTE command, configures a default
route on R2, but it doesn’t cause R1 to
advertise a default route to R2.
Finally, D is incorrect because we want to
advertise the default route from R1 to R2,
not from R2 to R1.
Let’s go to question 2.
R1’s G1/0 interface has an IP address of
172.20.20.17 and its G2/0 interface has an
IP address of 172.26.20.12.
Which of the following network commands will
activate EIGRP on both interfaces?
I’ll put up the four network commands here.
A, B, C, and D. Pause the video and find the
correct answer.
Okay, the answer is A, network 128.0.0.0 127.255.255.255.
I won’t explain all of them, but let’s
just take a look at the correct answer.
So, I have written the IP addresses of G1/0
and G2/0 in binary, as well as the EIGRP network
command, which is NETWORK 128.0.0.0 127.255.255.255.
Only the first bit of the wildcard mask is
0, so only the first bit has to match.
As you can see, the first bit is 1 in the
network command and each of the IP addresses,
so this command will activate EIGRP on both
interfaces.
Let’s go to question 3.
What is the correct order of priority when
determining the EIGRP router ID?
A, highest loopback interface address, highest
physical interface address, manual configuration.
B, highest physical interface address, highest
loopback address, manual configuration.
C, manual configuration, highest physical
interface address, highest loopback address.
Or D, manual configuration, highest loopback
interface address, highest physical interface
address.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is D, manual configuration takes
top priority.
If the router ID isn’t manually configured,
the highest IP address on a loopback interface
will become the EIGRP router ID.
Finally, if there are no loopback interfaces,
the highest IP address on a physical interface
will become the EIGRP router ID.
Okay, let’s move on to take a look at a
bonus question from Boson ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, for today's Boson ExSim practice question
we have a question about route selection.
So let's get right into it.
In which of the following situations does
a router use AD values to determine route
selection?
Select the best answer.
Okay, pause the video here to take a look
at each of the options and try to select the
correct answer.
Okay, hopefully you found it.
So let's go through each of them one by one.
First up, A. When multiple routes to different
destination networks are received, and each
of these routes is received from a different
routing protocol.
So, I think A is incorrect.
Why is that?
That's because each of the routes is to a
different destination network.
So the router doesn't have to choose between
them, it will simply put in all of the routes
in the routing table, because they are to
different destinations.
So I think A is incorrect.
How about B?
When multiple routes to the same destination
network are received, and all of these routes
are received from the same routing protocol.
So B is also incorrect.
So, all of the routes are to the same destination
network, so the router is going to have to
choose which one to put in the routing table.
However all of the routes are from the same
routing protocol, so the router won't use
AD to determine which route, because they
all have the same AD.
Instead it will use the metric value.
Okay, how about C?
When multiple routes to different destination
networks are received, and all of these routes
are received from the same routing protocol.
So, different destination networks again,
so C should be incorrect.
Because once again, just like in A, the router
will put all of the routes in the routing
table because they are to different destinations.
So let's see if D is correct.
When multiple routes to the same destination
network are received, so, same network so
the router will have to choose which one to
put in the routing table.
And each of these routes is received from
a different routing protocol.
Okay, so different routing protocol, to the
same destination network.
Because the routing protocol is different
the router can't compare the metrics, because
each routing protocol uses a totally different
metric.
So, instead the router will compare the AD
values.
So I think D is the correct answer, let's
see.
There we go, it is.
And here is Boson's explanation, including
a chart of the AD values of different routing
protocols and types of routes.
I covered these in day 24, directly connected,
static, EIGRP summary route, I don't think
I mentioned that one.
eBGP, and others.
Okay, so if you want further reading on top
of Boson's explanation you can check this
reference here, Cisco: Route Selection in
Cisco Routers.
So this is a link to free Cisco documentation
online which is another great study resource.
Okay, so that's today's Boson ExSim practice
question.
I highly recommend picking up a copy of Boson
ExSim.
I used it myself to study for my CCNA and
CCNP and it really helped me pass all of my
exams on the first try.
So if you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
I especially recommend watching today’s
lab video, since I will cover an aspect of
EIGRP I only briefly mentioned in this video,
that is unequal-cost load-balancing.
Sign up for my mailing list via the link in
the description, and I’ll send you all of
the flashcards and packet tracer lab files
for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to Ed, Tillman, Value, Magrathea,
Justin, John, Funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Gerrard,
Tibi, Vikram, Joyce, Marek, Velvijaykum, C
Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel, Yousif, Kone, Boson
Software, the makers of ExSim, Sidi, Devin,
Charlsetta, Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksander,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, July 7th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.