Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this video we’ll practice some basic
EIGRP configurations.
The configuration of EIGRP itself isn’t
part of the exam, but I want to use this video
to introduce some aspects of EIGRP that might
come up on the exam, specifically EIGRP metric,
path selection, and unequal-cost load-balancing.
My advice is to try to remember the extra
topics I introduce in this video, but don’t
worry about remembering all of the EIGRP-specific
commands.
Actually, this video will be half lab and
half lecture, since I want to introduce those
other topics.
This network here is EIGRP AS100.
So, we’ll have to make sure we configure
each of these routers in AS 100 or they won’t
become EIGRP neighbors, and therefore won’t
exchange route information.
In this network, the link between R1 and R2
is a GigabitEthernet connection, but the other
connections between routers are FastEthernet.
Step 1 is to configure the appropriate hostnames
and IP addresses on each device, and also
enable the router interfaces.
Instead of pre-configuring everything, I decided
to give you some extra practice with the basics.
To save time in this video I did pre-configure
everything before recording, but in the file
you download you’ll have to configure the
IP addresses and such yourself.
So, let’s move straight to step 2.
Configure a loopback interface on each router.
I only briefly mentioned these in the last
video when talking about router IDs, and I’ll
talk more about them in the OSPF videos coming
up next, but I wanted to give a little preview
here.
I’ll hop on R1 and configure its loopback
interface.
ENABLE.
First let’s check R1’s interfaces.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
So, you can see the interfaces which I pre-configured
here, but no loopback interface yet.
So, let’s make one.
Enter global config mode.
CONF T. INTERFACE, and let’s use the question
mark.
Here you can see the loopback option, so type
in LOOPBACK, or as a shortcut just the letter
‘L’ works too.
Then let’s use the question mark again.
As you can see the numerical range you can
use for the loopback interface is quite large,
I’m not sure what the maximum number of
loopback interfaces you can create on a router
is, but it probably depends on the type of
router.
Anyway, I’ll just make this ‘loopback
0’.
As soon as you enter the command, you get
a notice saying the interface has come up.
Now you can configure the IP address just
like on a physical interface.
IP ADDRESS 1.1.1.1 255.255.255.255.
It’s common to use a /32 mask for loopback
addresses.
I won’t talk in depth about loopback interfaces
in this video, just know that a loopback interface
is a virtual interface in the router.
Now let’s check the interfaces here once
more.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Now you can see the Loopback0 interface and
the IP address we configured.
Notice it’s up/up.
A loopback interface is always up unless you
manually disable it with the SHUTDOWN command.
Now I’ll go through the other routers and
configure their loopback interfaces.
Next up, R2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE L0.
As you can see, you can just type ‘L’
followed by the interface number to configure
a loopback interface.
IP ADDRESS 2.2.2.2 255.255.255.255.
Next let’s configure R3.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE L0.
IP ADDRESS 3.3.3.3 255.255.255.255.
And finally, R4.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE L0.
IP ADDRESS 4.4.4.4 255.255.255.255.
Okay, that’s all for step 2.
Next up let’s configure EIGRP on each router.
Since I’m on R4 already, I’ll start here.
You can enter EIGRP configuration mode directly
from interface configuration mode, there’s
no need to go back to global config mode.
ROUTER EIGRP, and for EIGRP we have to enter
the AS, autonomous system number.
This number must match for two routers to
become EIGRP neighbors.
In this lab, I’m using an AS number of 100.
From here, let’s enable EIGRP on all interfaces.
Actually, let me show you a little shortcut.
This is not recommended in real networks,
because you should be more precise about which
interfaces you want to enable EIGRP on.
But you can enable EIGRP on ALL interfaces
at once with this command.
NETWORK 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255.
Remember, the NETWORK command uses a wildcard
mask, so this is like a subnet mask of 0.0.0.0,
meaning a /0 prefix length.
So, ALL IP address are in the 0.0.0.0/0 range,
therefore EIGRP is activated on all interfaces.
Once again, not recommended in real networks,
but a simple trick for labs.
Next we are instructed to disable auto-summary.
The routers I used in the lecture video had
auto-summary disabled by default, however
these routers have it enabled by default,
so we should disable it.
Let me show you it’s activated.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
It says right here, ‘Automatic network summarization
is in effect.’
So, let’s turn that off.
NO AUTO-SUMMARY.
And let’s check once more.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
‘Automatic network summarization is not
in effect.’
That’s better.
Next up we are told to configure passive interfaces
where appropriate, including loopback interfaces.
So, I said in the lecture video that we should
make interfaces like G0/0, not connected to
any EIGRP neighbors, a passive interface.
However, it’s a good idea to do it on loopback
interfaces also.
Why?
Well, the router will treat the loopback interface
like any other interface and try to send EIGRP
messages out of it, even though the loopback
interface isn’t connected to any device.
It’s just a waste of resources on the router,
so we should make it a passive interface.
Let’s do that.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE G0/0.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
Now GigabitEthernet0/0 and Loopback0 are listed
as passive interfaces.
Okay, that’s all of the configuration on
R4, next I’ll do R3.
Directly from interface config mode, let’s
go into EIGRP config mode.
ROUTER EIGRP 100.
Again, make sure that AS number matches with
the other routers.
Here on R3 I’ll be a little more responsible
and use the exact prefix on each interface
to enable EIGRP.
NETWORK 10.0.13.0 0.0.0.3, that’s a /30
prefix length written as a wildcard mask.
NETWORK 10.0.34.0 0.0.0.3.
Don’t forget the loopback interface, we
want to advertise R3’s loopback address
to the other routers.
NETWORK 3.3.3.3 0.0.0.0.
That’s a /32 prefix length written as a
wildcard mask.
Next disable auto-summary.
NO AUTO-SUMMARY.
Finally, make Loopback0 a passive interface.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Let’s check the configurations.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
Auto-summary is disabled, these are the network
commands I configured, and Loopback0 is a
passive interface.
Looks good!
Next up I’ll do basically the same configurations
on R2.
ROUTER EIGRP 100.
NETWORK 10.0.12.0 0.0.0.3 NETWORK 10.0.24.0
0.0.0.3.
NETWORK 2.2.2.2 0.0.0.0.
NO AUTO-SUMMARY.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
That’s it.
I’ll quickly check that everything is okay.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
Auto-summary is disabled, the network commands
are correct, and Loopback0 is a passive interface.
Finally I’ll go on R1 and do the same configurations,
but we’ll spend some more time here and
get a little more in depth about how EIGRP
works.
ROUTER EIGRP 100.
NETWORK 10.0.12.0 0.0.0.3.
NETWORK 10.0.13.0 0.0.0.3.
Notice how quickly EIGRP forms adjacencies
with its neighbors, it’s basically instant.
NETWORK 1.1.1.1 0.0.0.0.
NO AUTO-SUMMARY.
PASSIVE-INTERFACE L0.
Okay, first up I’ll check DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS
like the others.
Auto-summary is disabled, I’ve configured
the correct network prefixes, loopback0 is
a passive interface, and you can also see
R1’s EIGRP neighbors down here, meaning
EIGRP was successfully enabled on its interfaces.
Let’s check a better command to view the
EIGRP neighbors.
DO SHOW IP EIGRP NEIGHBORS.
OSPF has basically the same command to view
neighbors, so remember this one.
You can see R1’s two neighbors, which interface
they are connected to, and some other information
that you don’t need to worry about now.
Let’s also check if R1 is receiving the
correct EIGRP routes.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE, and you can actually filter
the command to view only EIGRP routes in the
routing table by adding EIGRP on the end like
this.
You can also do commands like this, DO SHOW
IP ROUTE CONNECTED, which shows connected
routes.
If we configured static routes you could see
them with ‘SHOW IP ROUTE STATIC’, etc.
But this time, let’s view the EIGRP routes.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE EIGRP.
Notice the ‘D’ that indicates EIGRP routes.
So, R1 has routes to the loopback interfaces
of R2, R3, and R4.
Also routes to the 10.0.24.0 subnet between
R2 and R4, the 10.0.34.0 subnet between R3
and R4, and 192.168.4.0/24, R4’s internal
network.
Perfect!
Notice EIGRP’s metric numbers, for example
156,416 to R4’s loopback interface.
Fortunately, when we move to OSPF you’ll
see the numbers are much smaller and easier
to calculate.
Okay, now one last command, this one is important
to understand step 4.
DO SHOW IP EIGRP TOPOLOGY.
Here you can see more detailed information
about the EIGRP routes R1 has received, not
just the ones in the routing table.
For example, here are two routes to 192.168.4.0/24,
although only one is entered in the routing
table.
That’s the route via R2, since it has a
lower metric value because of the GigabitEthernet
link.
Okay, it’s time to go into lecture mode
to explain some things about EIGRP.
First off let me explain a little bit more
about EIGRP metric, even though I’ve mentioned
it briefly a few times.
By default, EIGRP uses bandwidth and delay
to calculate the metric of a route.
This is the formula used to calculate metric.
It looks quite complicated, but there’s
no need to memorize it.
Notice the ‘K’ values, K1, K2, K3, K4,
and K5 in the formula.
The default K values are K1 = 1, K2 = 0, K3
= 1, K4 = 0, and K5 = 0.
K1 is multiplied by bandwidth and K3 is multiplied
by delay.
Since you don’t have to worry about memorizing
this formula or actually calculating EIGRP
metric yourself, you can just think of EIGRP
metric like this.
Metric equals bandwidth plus delay.
But there’s something else you should know,
let me demonstrate here.
It’s not simply bandwidth plus delay, but
rather bandwidth of the slowest link in the
path to the destination, plus the delay of
all links in the path to the destination.
For example, let’s say R1 wants to send
traffic to R4’s LAN, 192.168.4.0/24.
The route via R2 is the best.
So, the bandwidth of the slowest link, that’s
this one here, is added to the delay of all
links, these three, and then you get the total
metric value of the route.
By the way, the routers don’t actually send
ping messages to measure the delay of each
link, the ‘delay’ value is actually a
default value based on the interface bandwidth.
So, what should you remember about EIGRP metric
for the test?
Remember that it’s calculated by adding
the bandwidth of the slowest link to the delay
of all links.
Let’s move on.
Now let’s cover some important EIGRP terminology.
Feasible distance means THIS ROUTER’s metric
value to the route’s destination.
From R1’s perspective, trying to reach 192.168.4.0/24
, that means the metric of the whole route,
from R1 to R2, then R2 to R4, then for R4
to send the traffic out of its own inteface.
But, there is another term you should know.
Reported distance, which is also known as
advertised distance.
This is the neighbor’s metric value to reach
the destination.
So, for this route the neighbor is R2, the
reported distance is R2’s metric to the
destination.
Note that these terms are NOT related to the
concept of administrative distance.
EIGRP uses the term ‘distance’, but this
is the metric used to compare EIGRP routes,
not the administrative distance which is used
to compare routes from different routing protocols.
Let’s take a look at the real costs in Packet
Tracer.
Here’s the output of the SHOW IP EIGRP TOPOLOGY
command, just for the route to the 192.168.4.0/24
network.
The number on the left is R1’s metric, the
Feasible Distance.
The number on the right is R1’s neighbor,
R2’s metric, the Reported Distance.
How about the route below it via R3?
This is the feasible distance, R1’s total
metric to reach the destination.
This is the reported distance, R1’s neighbor
R3’s metric to reach the destination.
Why is it important to know both of these
terms?
You need to know them to understand the next
two terms I’m going to introduce.
Here are the next two terms.
Successor is the term for the route with the
lowest metric to the destination, so it’s
the best route.
In this case, which route to 192.168.4.0/24
is the successor?
It’s the route via R2, because it has the
lower metric, it’s the best route.
Next term.
A Feasible Successor is an alternate route
to the destination, it’s not the best route,
but it must meet the ‘feasibility condition’.
Okay, pay attention here.
What is the feasibility condition that must
be met?
A route is considered a feasible successor
if it’s reported distance is lower than
the successor route’s feasible distance.
So, does the route via R3 meet this feasibility
condition?
It’s reported distance is 28,416.
The successor route via R2’s feasible distance
is 28,672.
28,416 is less than 28,672, so the route via
R3 is a feasible successor.
Why does EIGRP have this system of feasible
successors?
It’s a kind of loop-prevention.
If a route meets the feasibility requirement,
it is guaranteed not to be a looped route.
I’m not going to spend time explaining that
in depth, but remember that this is a loop-prevention
mechanism.
With that knowledge, let me now explain how
EIGRP does unequal-cost load-balancing, a
unique feature of EIGRP, because other routing
protocols only perform load-balancing if each
route’s metric is equal.
So, here is some output from the SHOW IP PROTOCOLS
command.
Down here it says EIGRP maximum metric variance
1.
This is the default value, 1.
With a variance of 1, only equal cost multipath,
ECMP, load-balancing will be performed.
This means a route’s feasible distance must
be equal to the successor route to be chosen
for load-balancing.
Actually, if another route’s FD is equal
to the successor route’s FD, that route
is a successor too, there can be multiple
successors.
So, with the default settings EIGRP doesn’t
do unequal-cost load-balancing.
For example, these are R1’s routes to 192.168.4.0/24.
This is the successor route’s FD, and this
is the feasible successor’s.
It’s higher, so it can’t be used to load-balance.
So, from EIGRP configuration mode I used the
VARIANCE command, and set it to 2.
What does that mean?
Well, it’s basically a multiplier.
VARIANCE 2 means that feasible successor routes
with an FD up to two times the successor route’s
FD can be used to load-balance.
Let me explain with our example.
Here are our routes.
The successor’s FD is 28,672, but I just
configured a variance of 2, so we can double
that.
28,672 times 2 equals 57,344.
The feasible successor’s FD is 30,976.
30,976 is less than 57,344, so the route via
R3 can now be used for load-balancing.
I’ll show you in the next slide that it
has now been entered in the routing table
of R1.
But let me emphasize one thing.
EIGRP will only perform unequal-cost load-balancing
over feasible successor routes.
If a route does’t meet the feasibility requirement,
it will NEVER be selected for load-balancing,
regardless of the variance.
This is because the feasibility requirement
is an important loop-prevention mechanism,
so the router will never ignore it and put
a non-feasible route in the routing table.
Here is that route to 192.168.4.0/24 as shown
in R1’s route table.
Notice that, even though the two routes have
different metric values, R1 now inserts both
into the routing table.
However, R1 will send slightly more traffic
via R2 than R3, because R2’s path has a
lower metric, it’s a faster path.
Before finishing up let me review those four
terms.
A route’s feasible distance is THIS router’s
metric value to the route’s destination.
A route’s reported distance is the neighbor
router’s metric value to the destination.
Remember that this is also called ‘Advertised
Distance’.
A successor route is the route with the
lowest metric to the destination, the best
route.
However, there can be multiple successors
if they have the same metric, EIGRP will do
ECMP load-balancing.
A feasible successor route is an alternate
route to the destination which meets the feasibility
condition.
And finally, that feasibility condition is
this: A route is considered a feasible successor
if it’s reported distance is lower than
the successor route’s feasible distance.
Now, at this point I usually show you an extra
lab in Boson NetSim, however since we just
did this mini-lecture and I found a really
relevant question in ExSim, let’s do another
question in ExSim instead.
Okay, for today's Boson ExSim practice question,
we have a question that's really relevant
to what we just studied.
So, click on 'launch simulator' and here it
is.
Select the following EIGRP terms from the
left and drag them to the right, placing them
over the corresponding definitions.
So these are the four terms we just looked
at.
Advertised distance, which is reported distance.
Feasible distance.
Feasible successor.
And successor.
And then the four definitions.
So, they give slightly different definitions
than what I gave you, so you'll have to think
about this a little bit.
The best metric along a path.
The best path to a destination network.
A backup path that is guaranteed to be loop
free.
And the metric that the next hop router, the
neighbor router, has calculated.
So pause the video here to match those terms
with the definitions.
Okay, hopefully you got the answer.
So, two of these terms, the ones with 'distance'
in the name, refer to a kind of metric, a
metric value.
And these two, successor and feasible successor,
refer to a kind of route in EIGRP.
So for example, successor is the best route
to any, or to a given destination.
Or as Boson puts it, the best path to a destination
network.
That is the successor route.
And feasible successor is the other kind of
path, a backup path that is guaranteed to
be loop free, that is an EIGRP feasible successor.
Okay, now we have the two kinds of metric.
One of them is the best metric along a path,
and the other is the metric that the next
hop router has calculated.
So, the metric that the next hop router has
calculated is the advertised distance.
It is the distance, the metric, that the neighbor
router advertises to the local router, this
router.
And finally the feasible distance is the best
metric along a path.
So, click on 'done', then 'show answer'.
And I was correct.
So this is Boson's explanation here.
And also it has a reference to some Cisco
documentation, Introduction to EIGRP.
This Cisco documentation is also a great resource
by the way.
Okay, so if you want to get a copy of Boson
ExSim, please follow the link in the description.
I highly recommend you do.
Actually, I'm studying for my CCNA now.
I already have my CCNA but I want to take
the new exam to help improve my course.
So I'm using Boson ExSim to help guide my
studies and it's really helpful.
So once again, if you want to get a copy,
please follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to Ed, Tillman, Value, Magrathea,
Justin, John, Funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Gerrard,
Tibi, Vikram, Joyce, Marek, Velvijaykum, C
Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel, Yousif, Sidi, Boson
Software, the makers of ExSim, Charlesetta,
Devin, Aleksander, Lito, Mike, Yonatan, and
Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, July 12th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.