Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like
these videos, please subscribe to follow along
with the series. Also, please like and leave
a comment, and share the video to help spread
this free series of videos. Thanks for your
help.
Today we will finish our studies of OSPF for
this course. Already we’ve covered OSPF
in much greater depth than RIP and EIGRP.
If you continue your studies to the CCNP and
CCIE level, you’ll see that there is much,
much more depth to OSPF. However, for the
purpose of this CCNA course we’ll finish
up our studies with this video. Once more,
here is exam topic 3.4, which covers OSPF.
After today’s video, you’ll be more than
ready to take on OSPF questions on the CCNA
exam. So let’s get started.
First let’s look at what we’ll cover in
this video. First up, OSPF network types.
These refer to the different kinds of connections
between OSPF routers, and how those connections
influence OSPF’s behavior. Next up we will
cover OSPF neighbor and adjacency requirements.
In day 2 we covered the process routers use
to become OSPF neighbors, however we didn’t
actually look at the requirements for a successful
neighbor adjacency. Then we’ll take a look
at a few of the LSA, Link State Advertisement,
types. There are many, but you only need to
be aware of a few for the CCNA. Make sure
to stick around until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson ExSim for
CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
Before we get into those topics I want to
take a minute to explain loopback interfaces
a little bit. In previous videos I’ve mentioned
them, and you’ve already practiced configuring
them in the past few lab videos, but let me
explain them a little more. A loopback interface
is a virtual interface in the router. You
already know that. It is always up/up (unless
you manually shut it down). So, this means
that the status of a loopback interface isn’t
dependent on a physical interface. Physical
interfaces can have hardware problems and
fail, however that can’t happen to a loopback
interface unless the router itself fails.
So, it provides a consistent IP address that
can be used to reach and identify the router.
Sometimes you need to send traffic directly
to a router. Let’s says R1 has no loopback
interface at the moment, and R4 receives a
packet destined for R1 at 10.0.13.1, the IP
address of its G1/0 interface. It might forward
it to R1 like this.
What if R1’s G1/0 interface goes down for
some reason? If R4 receives a packet destined
for R1 at 10.0.13.1, it will not be able to
send the packet to R1.
How about if R1 has a loopback interface,
1.1.1.1, and that is used to identify R1 instead
of 10.0.13.1? Even if a physical interface
fails, when R4 receives a packet destined
for R1’s loopback interface it will still
be able to send the packet to R1. So, that’s
why it’s a good idea to configure a loopback
interface on a router. It provides an interface
with an IP address that is always up, and
can consistently be used to identify and reach
the router.
Now let’s move on to look at the different
OSPF network types. The OSPF network type
refers to the type of connection between OSPF
neighbors, and the type influences how OSPF
behaves in some ways. The most common type
of connection in modern networks is Ethernet,
of course. There are three main OSPF network
types. The first is the Broadcast network
type, which is enabled by default on Ethernet
and FDDI interfaces. FDDI is an old technology
and you don’t need to spend time learning
about it. However, I will include it in the
flashcards for OSPF network types, you might
want to remember this one fact about it for
the exam, that the OSPF broadcast network
type is used by default. The next is the Point-to-point
network type, which is enabled by default
on PPP and HDLC interfaces. You don’t need
to learn PPP and HDLC in depth for the current
CCNA exam, but I will mention them briefly
later in this video. The last main network
type is Non-broadcast. It is enabled by default
on Frame Relay and X.25 interfaces. Again,
you don’t need to learn about these interface
types for the exam, but I will include them
in the flashcards for this video regarding
OSPF network types. Take a look at the OSPF
exam topics again. 3.4b mentions the Point-to-point
network type, and 3.4c mentions the Broadcast
network type. So, those are the network types
we will focus on now.
First up, the broadcast network type. As I
just mentioned, this network type is enabled
on Ethernet and FDDI interfaces by default.
For this course, our main focus is Ethernet,
and in the previous videos all of the OSPF
connections we’ve looked at have used the
Broadcast network type, because they are all
Ethernet connections. In the network diagram
above, these are all Ethernet connections,
remember ‘G’ means ‘Gigabit Ethernet’,
and therefore these connections between the
routers are all using the Broadcast network
type. Now let’s cover a few characteristics
of the Broadcast network type. First up, routers
dynamically discover neighbors by sending
and listening for OSPF Hello messages using
the multicast address 224.0.0.5. You already
know this from the previous video when I showed
you how OSPF routers become neighbors. However,
not all network types dynamically discover
neighbors like this. We won’t cover this
network type, but with the ‘Non-broadcast’
network type you must manually configure neighbors.
Okay, next point. A DR, designated router,
and BDR, backup designated router, must be
elected on each subnet. However in cases like
the G1/0 interface of R1, R3, R4, and R5 where
there are no OSPF neighbors, there is just
a DR, no BDR. Routers which aren’t the DR
or BDR for the subnet become a ‘DROther’.
I’ve heard a few ways to pronounce that,
but I say ‘D R Other’. So, let’s look
at the network above. Each subnet needs a
DR. These subnets are easy, there are no OSPF
neighbors so each router becomes the DR for
the subnet. How about the 192.168.1.0/30 subnet
between R1 and R2? In the next slide I’ll
show you how the DR is elected, but let’s
say R2 is the DR. So, R1 becomes the BDR for
the segment. How about the 192.168.2.0/29
subnet that R2, R3, R4, and R5 connect to?
For example, R5 might be the DR, R4 the BDR,
and then R2 and R3 become DROthers. You’re
probably wondering how these elections work,
and what the purpose of the DR and BDR is.
Well, let’s get into it.
So, here’s how the DR and BDR are elected.
There is an order of priority. First up, the
router with the highest OSPF interface priority
in the subnet becomes the DR for the segment.
However, all interfaces have the same priority
by default, so then the routers compare their
OSPF router IDs. The router with the highest
OSPF router ID wins. ’First place’ in
the election becomes the DR for the subnet,
and ‘second place’ becomes the BDR. The
default OSPF interface priority is 1 on all
interfaces. So as I said, by default the router
with the highest router ID will become the
DR for the segment.
Here’s some partial output from SHOW IP
OSPF INTERFACE G0/0 on R5. Notice the router
ID. I configured a loopback interface on each
router, and the IP address of the loopback
interface became the router ID. State DR,
and the priority is the default of 1. R5 has
the highest router ID of the routers connected
to the 192.168.2.0/29 subnet, so it became
the DR. Down here the DR, R5 itself, and BDR,
R4, for the segment are listed, including
their router IDs and the interface IP address
in the subnet.
And here’s the same output for R2. The main
difference I want to point out is the state
of DROTHER. Now, what if I want to make R2
the DR for the segment instead of R5? Let’s
see how to change the OSPF interface priority.
The command to change the OSPF priority of
an interface is IP OSPF PRIORITY, followed
by the priority, with a range of 0 to 255.
I changed it to the maximum, 255, on R2. As
a side note, if you set the OSPF interface
priority to 0, the router CANNOT be the DR/BDR
for the subnet, no matter what. So, let’s
check if R2 has become the DR for the segment.
That’s strange. R2’s state is still DROTHER,
even though it has the highest priority. Why
is that? It’s because the DR/BDR election
is ‘non-preemptive’. You’ll learn more
about ‘preemption’ in Day 29 when we learn
about First-Hop Redundancy Protocols. But
what ‘non-preemptive’ means is that once
the DR/BDR are selected they will keep their
role until OSPF is reset, the interface fails/is
shut down, etc. So, although this is a bad
idea to do in a live network, I’ll go reset
the OSPF process on R5 and let’s see what
happens.
So, I reset the OSPF process on R5, and you
can see that all of its neighbors went DOWN.
Then R2 and R4 returned to the FULL state,
but not R3. There’s an important reason
for that, you’ll learn soon. Then I used
the SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR command to view
the neighbor state of R5’s neighbors. Look
here, there are two important points about
OSPF we can learn by analyzing this section.
First, R4 became the DR, not R2. R2 became
the BDR. What can we learn from that? We can
learn that when the DR goes down, the BDR
becomes the new DR. Then an election is held
for the next BDR. R4, which was the BDR, instantly
stepped up to be the new DR, and then an election
was held between the other routers for the
next BDR. R2 has the highest priority, 255,
so it became the BDR. Okay, next point. R3
is a DROther, and is stable in the 2-way state.
R5 became a DROther also, by the way. What
can we learn from this? We can learn that
DROthers will only move to the FULL state
with the DR and BDR of the subnet. The neighbor
state with other DROthers will be 2-way. This
gives us a hint to the purpose of the DR and
BDR, which I’ll cover in the next slide.
But remember these two points, that the BDR
becomes the DR if the current DR is removed,
even if it doesn’t have the highest priority.
Also that DROthers don’t form full adjacencies
with other DROthers, they remain in the 2-way
state.
To repeat, in the broadcast network type,
routers will only form a full OSPF adjacency
with the DR and BDR of the segment. Therefore,
routers only exchange LSAs with the DR and
BDR. DROthers will not exchange LSAs with
each other. Remember that, in the 2-way state,
routers haven’t shared LSAs with each other
yet. All routers will still have the same
LSDB, but this reduces the amount of LSAs
flooding the network. Let’s see an example.
If 6 routers are connected to the same segment
and they all share LSAs with each other, it
will end up like this. A whole lot of LSAs
flooding and congesting the network. How about
if we use a DR and BDR?
If routers only exchange LSAs with the DR
and BDR, as you can see the number of LSAs
flooding around the network is reduced. To
be honest, on modern routers it’s probably
not a big deal in most cases, but it still
does help reduce unnecessary network traffic.
By the way, when routers need to send messages
to the DR and BDR they use multicast address
224.0.0.6. This is different than the OSPF
‘all routers’ multicast address of 224.0.0.5.
Here’s a quick review of the OSPF neighbor
process. Remember that I said that these first
steps involve becoming neighbors? So, when
routers reach this point in the process, they
are OSPF neighbors. Connections between two
DROthers stop at this point. Routers will
only continue on to exchange LSAs and form
a full OSPF adjacency with the DR and BDR.
So, to summarize, this means that the DR and
BDR form a full adjacency with ALL routers
in the subnet, including the DROthers. And
DROthers will form a FULL adjacency only with
the DR/BDR.
I showed you this command, SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE
BRIEF, before. Here I did it on R3, which
is a DROther. Notice the neighbor count on
its G0/0 interface. F indicates the number
of full adjacencies, and C indicates the total
count of neighbors. So, R3 has two Full adjacencies,
with R2 and R4. But it has three total neighbors,
R2, R4 and R5.
For more detail, here is SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE
G0/0 on R3. It gives the same information
here, ‘Neighbor Count is 3’, that’s
R3’s total number of OSPF neighbors. ‘Adjacent
neighbor count is 2’, those are the neighbors
R3 has formed a Full adjacency with. And below
it, its two adjacent neighbors are listed.
R2, the BDR, and R4, the DR. Okay, that’s
enough for the Broadcast network type for
now, let’s move on.
Now let’s take a look at the ‘point-to-point’
network type. Notice that I changed the connection
between R1 and R2 to a ‘serial’ connection.
I will give a very brief overview of serial
connections in the next slide, but first let
me introduce the basics of the point-to-point
connection type. This network type is enabled
on serial interfaces using the PPP or HDLC
encapsulations by default. PPP and HDLC are
both Layer 2 encapsulations, similar to Ethernet,
except they are used on serial connections.
Same as the Broadcast network type, routers
dynamically discover neighbors by sending/listening
for OSPF Hello messages using multicast address
224.0.0.5. However, here’s a difference.
A DR and BDR are NOT elected. Why is that?
As the network type name implies, these encapsulations
are used for ‘point-to-point’ connections
between two routers. Therefore there is no
point in electing a DR and BDR. The two routers
will form a Full adjacency with each other,
without the need to elect a DR and BDR.
Okay, let me give a very brief overview of
serial connections. I say very brief, because
serial connections are an old technology which
isn’t very common anymore. They still exist,
but Ethernet is much more dominant. In fact,
serial connections have been removed from
the exam topics except for the OSPF ‘point-to-point’
network type. So, although you won’t be
tested directly on knowledge of serial interfaces,
you should have a basic understanding of them.
This photo shows some serial interfaces and
cables. Notice that both the ports and the
cables are different than Ethernet cables.
To explain serial connections, I’ll show
you how I configure R1’s S2/0 interface.
You don’t need a deep understanding of this
material, but at least know the basics I introduce
here. First up, one side of a serial connection
functions as DCE, which stands for Data Communications
Equipment. The other side functions as DTE,
which stands for Data Terminal Equipment.
Why is this significant? Well, on serial connections,
the DCE side needs to specify the clock rate,
which is the speed, of the connection. So,
in this case R1 has the DCE side of the cable
and therefore needs to tell R2 what speed
the connection will operate at. The command
is ‘clock rate’, and then you can see
some standard values that can be used. All
of these are in bits per second, by the way.
I configured a clock rate of 64000 bits per
second, aka 64 kilobits per second, added
an IP address, and used NO SHUTDOWN. Here’s
an important point. Ethernet interfaces use
the SPEED command to configure the interface’s
operating speed. Serial interfaces use the
CLOCK RATE command.
Let’s continue. I checked the interface
with SHOW INTERFACE S2/0. Notice that the
encapsulation is HDLC. On Cisco routers, the
default encapsulation on a serial interface
is HDLC. Actually, it’s Cisco’s own version
called ‘cHDLC’, Cisco HDLC, but it displays
as just ‘HDLC’ in the CLI. Once again,
this is a Layer 2 encapsulation, like Ethernet,
except it’s used on serial connections.
Here’s the structure of an HDLC frame, taken
from Wikipedia. You don’t need to learn
this, but pause the video if you want to take
a look. One thing to note is that there is
no MAC address field. So, MAC addresses actually
aren’t used. I mentioned the PPP encapsulation
too, let’s see how to configure the router
to use that encapsulation instead. Simply
use the ENCAPSULATION PPP command on the interface.
Note that if you change the encapsulation,
it must match on both ends or the interface
will go down. If they use two different encapsulations
it’s like they are speaking two different
languages, they won’t be able to communicate.
I did SHOW INTERFACE S2/0 again, and you can
see the encapsulation has changed to PPP.
I did the same on R2, by the way, so the interface
is up.
Here’s the configuration I did on R1. The
SERIAL RESTART-DELAY 0 command was there by
default, so I only configured the clock rate,
encapsulation, and IP address. And here it
is on R2, with no CLOCK RATE command because
it is the DTE end.
Now you’re probably wondering, how can I
tell which side is DCE and which is DTE? Well,
to show you I had to recreate this connection
in Packet Tracer. GNS3, which I use to make
these lectures, doesn’t handle physical,
Layer 1, things like this well, so both sides
display as DCE. Anyway, the command to view
it is SHOW CONTROLLERS, followed by the interface
ID. As you can see R1 is the DCE side, and
it has the clock rate of 64,000 bits I configured.
I used the same command on R2, and you can
see it is the DTE side, and it has detected
the Tx, transmit, and Rx, receive clocks from
R1.
So, that’s a very basic overview of serial
connections. Here’s a summary of what you
should know. The default encapsulation on
a serial interface is HDLC. You can configure
them to use PPP encapsulation instead with
this command: ENCAPSULATION PPP. If you change
the encapsulation on one side, remember to
change it on the other too! One side of the
connection is DCE and the other is DTE. You
can identify which side is DCE and which is
DTE with this command: SHOW CONTROLLERS, followed
by the interface ID. Finally, remember to
configure the clock rate, the speed of the
connection, on the DCE side with this command:
CLOCK RATE, followed by the clock rate in
bits per second.
Let’s return to the OSPF point-to-point
network type. Here’s the output of SHOW
IP OSPF NEIGHBOR on R2. Notice that R2 has
a full adjacency with R1, but instead of DR,
BDR, or DROTHER, a dash is displayed. This
is because the point-to-point network type
doesn’t use DRs or BDRs, as I mentioned
before.
Final point on this topic, you can manually
configure the network type an interface uses.
The command is IP OSPF NETWORK, followed by
the network type. You might notice one more
type that I haven’t mentioned, that is the
‘point-to-multipoint’ network type. It’s
more of a ‘sub-type’. You don’t need
to learn about it for the CCNA, but feel free
to do a Google search if you’re curious.
So, why would you change the OSPF network
type? For example, if two routers are directly
connected with an Ethernet link, like in the
diagram below, there is no need for a DR/BDR.
You can configure the point-to-point network
type in this case, although you don’t have
to. Note that not all network types work on
all link types. For example, a serial link
cannot use the broadcast network type. This
is because serial links don’t support Layer
2 broadcast frames, which is necessary for
the broadcast network type.
Okay here’s a chart for quick review. One
thing I didn’t bring up yet in this video
is that point-to-point networks use the same
default timers as broadcast networks. The
default Hello timer is 10 seconds and the
default Dead timer is 40 seconds. You don’t
have to learn this network type, but just
for your information the non-broadcast network
type uses a default Hello timer of 30 seconds
and Dead timer of 120 seconds. Okay, let’s
move on.
Now let’s move on to look at some requirements
of OSPF neighbor relationships. Usually, routers
will become OSPF neighbors without issue,
but I will introduce a few of the problems
that can occur. I already mentioned some of
these in previous videos, but let’s review.
First requirement, the area number must match
for two routers to become OSPF neighbors.
We’ll use this small topology of two routers
to demonstrate. Here’s R1’s OSPF config.
OSPF is enabled on G0/0 in area 0. However,
R2’s G0/0 is in area 1. When I enter SHOW
IP OSPF NEIGHBOR on both devices, they have
no OSPF neighbors. Let’s fix the issue.
I changed the network command on R2 to use
area 0. As you can see, they successfully
became OSPF neighbors.
So, that’s the first rule. For two routers
to become OSPF neighbors, they must be in
the same area. But we already covered that
before. Next rule. The interfaces must be
in the same subnet to become OSPF neighbors.
We covered this one before too, but let me
demonstrate it.
Notice that R1 and R2’s G0/0 interfaces
are now in different subnets. I activated
OSPF on both of the interfaces. But when I
check for OSPF neighbors, they don’t come up.
I once again configured R2’s interface in
the same subnet as R1, and also made sure
to edit the network command so that OSPF is
once again activated on G0/0. Now R1 and R2
are OSPF neighbors again.
Next up, here’s one we haven’t covered
yet. The OSPF process must not be shutdown.
You can actually ‘shutdown’ the OSPF process
on the router like an interface. This disables
OSPF operation, without removing the OSPF
configurations. Let’s check it out.
Here’s how to do it. From OSPF configuration
mode on R2, I used the SHUTDOWN command. Then
a message is displayed indicating that its
neighbor R1 has gone from FULL to DOWN, and
no neighbors are displayed in SHOW IP OSPF
NEIGHBOR. Then I enable OSPF again with NO
SHUTDOWN, A message indicates the neighbor
is back up, and you can see it in SHOW IP
OSPF NEIGHBOR.
That one won’t be a problem unless you manually
shutdown the OSPF process, so usually it’s
not a problem. Next requirement, the OSPF
router IDs must be unique.
Let’s see how that works. I haven’t configured
the router IDs of R1 and R2, and I also haven’t
configured any loopback interfaces, so each
router has selected its G0/0 IP address as
its router ID, 192.168.1.1 for R1 and 192.168.1.2
for R2. So, I configured 192.168.1.1 as R2’s
router ID, the same as R1’s. As I have shown
you before, you need to reload the router
or use CLEAR IP OSPF PROCESS for the new router
ID to take effect. So I used CLEAR IP OSPF
PROCESS. Immediately the neighbor goes down
because I cleared the OSPF process. But then,
instead of the neighbor coming back up, this
message is displayed. ‘OSPF detected duplicate
router-id 192.168.1.1 from 192.168.1.1 on
interface GigabitEthernet0/0, and then the
neighbor stays down. So, let’s fix this.
I removed the manually configured router ID
with NO ROUTER-ID. Note that you don’t actually
have to specify the router ID when removing
the command. NO ROUTER-ID has the same effect
as NO ROUTER-ID 192.168.1.1, both remove the
command. This time, without having to reset
the OSPF process R2’s router ID returns
to 192.168.1.2 and the neighbor comes up again.
Why didn’t I have to use CLEAR IP OSPF PROCESS?
I actually didn’t expect this, but I realized
that it’s because R2 had no other OSPF neighbors
at the time, so the router was free to change
R2’s router ID without worrying about it
effecting other neighbors.
So, watch out for duplicate router IDs. Next
requirement, the Hello and Dead timers must
match. In both of the network types we looked
at today, Broadcast and Point-to-Point, the
defaults are 10 seconds and 40 seconds. But
you can manually change these settings.
The Hello and Dead timers are configured directly
on the interface. Here’s how to configure
the Hello timer. IP OSPF HELLO-INTERVAL, followed
by the interval in seconds. I set it to 5.
Then the Dead timer. IP OSPF DEAD-INTERVAL,
and I set it to 20. As you can see, the neighbor
then goes down. Note that I changed both values,
the Hello timer and the Dead timer, but even
if you only change one the neighbor will still
go down. So, let’s fix this. I used NO IP
OSPF HELLO-INTERVAL and NO IP OSPF DEAD-INTERVAL
to return the timers to their default values.
Notice the method I used to return them to
their defaults, it’s the same as for the
router ID. I didn’t have to actually specify
NO IP OSPF HELLO-INTERVAL 5 or DEAD-INTERVAL
20 to remove the commands. Anyway, now that
the Hello and Dead timers match again, the
neighbor is back up.
So, remember to check the Hello and Dead intervals
if you’re having trouble with OSPF adjacencies.
Next up, authentication settings must match.
What does that mean? Well, you can configure
an OSPF password, and then the router will
only become neighbors with routers that have
a matching OSPF password. Let’s take a look.
The OSPF password is configured directly on
the interface too. I used IP OSPF AUTHENTICATION-KEY,
followed by a password of ‘jeremy’. Note
that this doesn’t actually enable OSPF authentication
on the interface. The password is configured,
but we need to enable OSPF authentication.
So, I used IP OSPF AUTHENTICATION to enable
it on the interface. Then the neighbor goes
down, because R1 isn’t providing R2 a matching
password. Actually, I haven’t configured
OSPF authentication on R1 yet, so it’s not
providing R2 with any OSPF password. So, to
fix this we could either configure the same
authentication settings on R1, or remove the
authentication from R2. I removed them from
R2, and now the neighbor is back up again.
Okay, there are two more things to mention.
Number 7 is that the IP MTU settings on the
interfaces must match. The IP MTU is the maximum
size of an IP packet that will be sent out
of the interface. The default is usually 1500
bytes, but it can be configured. Note that
this requirement and the next one are special,
even if the settings don’t match, the neighbors
can become OSPF neighbors, but OSPF won’t
function properly. Let’s see.
You can configure the IP MTU of an interface
with this command: IP MTU, followed by the
MTU in bytes. I changed it to 1400 on R2’s
G0/0, so it doesn’t match with the default
1500 on R1’s G0/0. I waited a minute and
then checked the neighbor table, R1 and R2
actually remained neighbors. Then I reset
the OSPF process on R2. I waited a minute,
but no message came indicating that the neighbors
had reached the full state. I checked the
neighbor table again, and it was stuck in
the EXSTART state. After waiting a few minutes,
a few more messages were displayed, and these
kept on repeating by the way. So, clearly
OSPF isn’t functioning properly. I used
NO IP MTU to return the MTU to the default
value, and then finally R1 and R2 reached
the FULL state.
So, if your OSPF neighbors are having trouble
reaching the FULL state make sure to check
the MTU settings. Okay, last one. The OSPF
network type must match. Let’s see what
happens if they don’t.
So, to demonstrate this problem I configured
a loopback interface on R2 with an IP address,
and advertised it to R1. Then I changed the
network type on R2’s G0/0 to point-to-point.
R1’s G0/0 is still using the default broadcast
network type. A message is displayed saying
the neighbor went down, but then it went right
back to the FULL state. R1 even displays as
FULL in SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR. So what’s
the problem? Let’s see on R1.
Here’s R1. R2 appears in the neighbor table
in the FULL state, so you might think OSPF
is working fine.  But look at the routing table.
R2’s loopback address should be in R1’s
routing table, but it’s not. This is what
will happen when the OSPF network type doesn’t
match. It can be tricky to troubleshoot because
the neighbor state is Full, so it can seem
like everything is working fine. Make sure
to watch out for that when troubleshooting
OSPF.
Okay, I’ll leave it there. There is of course
more we can get into, but I’ve given you
plenty for the CCNA. Make sure to remember
these requirements. You don’t have to memorize
them as a list, but make sure that if you
see these problems on a router you are able
to identify and fix them.
The final topic for today’s video is LSA
types. These aren’t specifically mentioned
the exam topics list, so I’m just going
to spend a few minutes giving you a brief
overview of some basic LSA types. To do so,
I’ve taken this topology from earlier and
modified it, adding an Internet link on R4.
R4 has a default route to the Internet, and
I use DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE to make
it advertise it to the other routers. So,
let’s talk about LSAs. As you already know,
the OSPF LSDB is made up of LSAs. All routers
in the same OSPF area share the same LSDB.
There are 11 types of LSA, but there are only
3 you should know for the CCNA. Those are
type 1, the ‘router LSA’. Type 2, the
‘network LSA’. And type 5, the ‘AS external
LSA’. Let’s take a brief look at each
type.
First up is type 1, the router LSA. Every
router running OSPF generates this type of
LSA. The router LSA identifies the router
using its router ID. The router LSA also lists
networks attached to the router’s OSPF-activated
interfaces. Next up, the type 2 aka network
LSA. It is generated by the DR of each ‘multi-access’
network. An example of a multi-access network
is an Ethernet network using the broadcast
network type. This type of LSA lists the routers
which are attached to the multi-access network.
Last type for today, the type 5 aka AS-external
LSA. This type of LSA is generated by ASBRs
to describe routes to destinations outside
of the autonomous system, the OSPF domain.
Here’s a look at the LSDB on R1, using the
command SHOW IP OSPF DATABASE. Note that it
doesn’t actually matter which router I use
the command on, the output will be the same
because all routers in the area have the same
LSDB. Notice that each router has generated
a Type 1 Router LSA identifying itself. This
view doesn’t show the contents of each LSA,
but each of these router LSAs contains information
about the networks each router is connected
to. Notice that there is only one Type 2 Network
LSA, generated by R4 for the 192.168.2.0/29
subnet. Even though R1, R3, and R5 are DRs
on their G1/0 interfaces, no other routers
are connected to the interfaces so no Type
2 LSA is generated. Finally, notice that a
Type 5 AS-External LSA is generated by R4.
It is sharing its default route to the Internet
with the other routers. Okay, that’s all
about LSAs. Once again, they aren’t explicitly
stated in the exam topics list, but I just
wanted to give you a basic introduction to
some of the basic LSA types you will encounter.
I told you we were going to cover OSPF in
much more detail than RIP and EIGRP, and over
these past three days we definitely did that.
OSPF is a major topic on the exam, so make
sure you understand the material in these
videos. Watch them multiple times if you have
to, and feel free to ask questions in the
comment section. Now let’s review what we
covered in today’s video and then move on
to the quiz. First we covered the OSPF network
types, focusing on the two you need to know
for the CCNA, Broadcast and Point-to-Point.
Because Ethernet connections are dominant
in modern networks, most of the time you’ll
be using the Broadcast network type. But also
be familiar with the Point-to-Point type,
and the basics of serial interfaces that I
introduced in this video. Then I introduced
some requirements for OSPF neighbors and adjacencies.
You don’t have to memorize the list of them,
but make sure you can identify them all and
fix any problems. Finally I briefly introduced
the three most basic OSPF LSA types. Type
1, the Router LSA. Type 2, the Network LSA.
And Type 5, the AS-External LSA. Make sure
to watch until the end of the quiz for a bonus
question from Boson ExSim for CCNA, my favorite
set of practice exams for the CCNA. Now here’s
question 1 of the quiz.
Which option states a characteristic of the
OSPF point-to-point network type that is different
than the OSPF broadcast network type? A, DR
and BDR elections are held. B, DR and BDR
elections are not held. C, Neighbors are dynamically
discovered. Or D, neighbors are not dynamically
discovered. Pause the video to think about
your answer.
The answer is B. In the OSPF point-to-point
network type, DR and BDR elections are not
held. C, neighbors are dynamically discovered,
is a correct statement about the point-to-point
network type, but it is also true about the
broadcast network type, so it is incorrect.
Let’s go to question 2.
There is an OSPF broadcast network with 5
connected routers. R1 is the DR on its G0/0
interface. How many FULL OSPF adjacencies
does R1 have on the interface? A, 1 with the
BDR. B, 2 with the DR and BDR. C, 4 with all
neighbors. D, 5 with all routers connected
to the segment. Pause the video to think about
your answer.
The answer is C. The DR forms a FULL adjacency
with all neighbors in the broadcast network
segment, so C is correct. It doesn’t form
a neighbor relationship at all with itself,
so B and D are incorrect. A is incorrect because
it identifies only one of R1’s fully adjacent
neighbors, not all four. Let’s go to question
3.
Which of the following are requirements for
routers to become OSPF neighbors? Select two.
A, Hello and Dead timers must match. B, OSPF
Process IDs must match. C, OSPF Router IDs
must match. D, Interfaces must be in the same
area. E, Interfaces must be in different areas.
Or F, interfaces must be in different subnets.
Pause the video to think about your answers,
select two.
The answers are A and D. For two routers to
become OSPF neighbors, the Hello and Dead
timers on their interfaces must match. They
also must be in the same area. For reference,
here are the requirements for OSPF neighbors
as shown earlier in the video. Okay, let’s
go to question 4.
Which of the following OSPF LSA types is generated
only by the DR of a multi-access network,
such as the broadcast network type? A, type
1. B, type 2. C, type 3. Or D, type 5. Pause
the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, type 2. Type 2 is the ‘Network’
LSA, and is generated by the DR of each multi-access
network. It lists the routers which are attached
to the multi-access network. A, Type 1, is
the Router LSA type. D, Type 5, is the AS-External
LSA type. C, Type 3, is one I didn’t mention
in this video. It’s called the ‘Summary’
LSA type. Okay, let’s move on to question
5.
R1 is connected to an OSPF Broadcast network
on its G0/0 interface. R4 is the DR of the
segment and R3 is the BDR. All routers on
the segment have the default OSPF priority.
You issue the ip ospf priority 100 command
on R1’s G0/0 to make it the DR. Which of
the following statements are true about the
network after you issue the command? Select
two. A, R1 is the DR. B, R1 is the BDR. C,
R1 is still a DROther because its priority
isn’t high enough. D, if you issue the clear
ip ospf process command on R4, R1 will become
the BDR. E, if you issue the clear ip ospf
process command on R4, R1 will become the
DR. And F, the DR and BDR of the network are
unchanged. Pause the video to think about
your answers, select two.
The answers are D and F. The default OSPF
priority is 1 on all interfaces, so after
entering the command R1’s G0/0 interface
has the highest priority, therefore C is incorrect.
It’s still a DROther, but priority isn’t
the problem. The DR and BDR will not automatically
give up their positions, so R1 will not become
the DR or BDR. Therefore A and B are incorrect,
and F is correct. If you issue the CLEAR IP
OSPF PROCESS command on R4, the current BDR,
R3, will automatically become the DR, not
R1. Therefore E is incorrect. However, if
you issue that command, when R3 becomes the
new DR, an election is held for the new BDR.
Since R1 has the highest priority, it will
become the new BDR for the segment. So D is
correct. That’s all for the quiz. Let’s
move on to a bonus question in Boson ExSim
for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson ExSim practice
question. You issue the SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE
FASTETHERNET 0/1 command on Router1 and receive
the following output. Here is the output of
the command, and here's the question. Which
of the following statements is correct? Select
the best answer. Okay, pause the video now.
Read each of the statements, and select the
best answer.
Okay, let's check. So, I believe the correct
answer is D. First let me explain the incorrect
options and then I'll go on to D. First up,
A says Router1 is the DR for the segment.
Well it says right here, Router1's state is
DROTHER. So that's incorrect. B, Router1 is
connected to a point-to-multipoint network.
It says here that the network type is BROADCAST,
so that's incorrect. C, Router1 is configured
with incorrect timer settings. You can see
the timers here, they are the defaults. Also,
Router1 has five OSPF neighbors, so I don't
think there is any problem with Router1's
timer settings. E, the BDR has a priority
higher than 50. You can see here that Router1's
priority is 50 and it's a DROTHER. But the
BDR doesn't necessarily have a priority higher
than 50. It might have the same priority as
Router1, 50, but a higher router ID. So E
is incorrect. Now, why do I think D is correct?
The key to this question is knowing the difference
between an OSPF neighbor adjacency. Sometimes
those words are used to mean the same thing,
but technically speaking in OSPF they are
different. Look here in the output. Neighbor
count is 5, adjacent neighbor count is 2.
So, although Router1 has 5 OSPF neighbors,
only 2 of those are adjacencies, full adjacencies
in the OSPF FULL neighbor state. This number
5 includes not only the FULL adjacencies with
the DR and BDR, but also Router1's DROTHER
neighbors. Remember, a DROTHER will only reach
the 2-way state with another DROTHER. So,
to summarize Router1 is a DROTHER in this
OSPF broadcast network. And DROTHERs can only
establish adjacencies with the DR and BDR,
2 routers. So, I chose this question because
I wanted to make it clear, the difference
between a neighbor and a full OSPF adjacency.
So, I'll click on show answer, and the answer
is correct. Okay, pause the video now if you
want to read Boson's explanation here. Also
notice that it includes a reference to some
Cisco documentation about the SHOW IP OSPF
INTERFACE command. And this Cisco documentation,
as I have said before, is available free online
and it's another great study resource. Okay,
so if you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
As I've already said, these are the practice
exams I used when studying for both my CCNA
and CCNP, and I highly recommend them. So
once again, follow that link in the video
description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video. There is a flashcard deck to use with
the software ‘Anki’. There will also be
a packet tracer practice lab so you can get
some hands-on practice. That will be in the
next video. Sign up for my mailing list via
the link in the description, and I’ll send
you all of the flashcards and packet tracer
lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members. Recently
I’ve noticed an increase in the number of
channel members, and I’m so thankful to
all of you, both JCNA and JCNP-level members.
Previously I read out the names of all the
JCNP-level members one by one, but the list
is getting longer so I’ll just leave the
list up here. Your support helps me keep making
and releasing these videos every week, so
I’m really grateful for your support. This
is the list of JCNP-level members at the time
of recording by the way, August 23rd 2020,
if you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching. Please subscribe to
the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA. If you want to leave a tip,
check the links in the description. I'm also
a Brave verified publisher and accept BAT,
or Basic Attention Token, tips via the Brave
browser. That's all for now.