Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover all you need to
know about ‘first hop redundancy protocols’,
or FHRPs.
This isn’t the name of a specific protocol,
it’s a type of protocol, and there are three
FHRPs you should be aware of for the CCNA.
Let’s check the exam topics list.
Here it is, topic 3.5, ‘describe the purpose
of first hop redundancy protocol’, I think
there should be an ‘s’ on the end there.
There is no mention of configuration, so you
don’t need to worry about about configuring
any of the FHRPs for the exam.
However, in this video I will show you basic
configurations for one of the FHRPs, so you
can try it out in the next lab video.
Even if you don’t need to know the configurations
for the exam, getting a little hands-on practice
will help you understand how these FHRPs work.
Here’s what we’ll cover in today’s video.
First up, I’ll introduce the purpose of
first hop redundancy protocols.
Then I’ll introduce three different FHRPs.
HSRP, hot standby router protocol.
VRRP, virtual router redundancy protocol.
And GLBP, gateway load balancing protocol.
It may seem like a lot to learn about three
different protocols in one video, but you
just need to be able to make basic comparisons
of each, you don’t need to know them in-depth.
Finally we’ll spend a few minutes learning
some basic configurations of HSRP, hot standby
router protocol.
After the quiz at the end of the video I will
feature a bonus question from Boson ExSim
for CCNA, a set of practice exams for the
CCNA.
I studied using ExSim when preparing for both
my CCNA and CCNP exams, and I highly recommend
that you do too.
To get ExSim, follow the link in the video
description.
Okay, let’s get started.
I used this same diagram back in Day 20 when
talking about spanning tree protocol, to demonstrate
the concept and importance of redundancy in
networks.
For example, if there is only one connection
to the Internet and it fails due to a hardware
failure or something else, these PCs will
no longer be able to reach the Internet.
In your home, losing Internet access for some
time would be frustrating, but probably not
a disaster.
For most modern businesses, however, it would
be a big problem.
So, we can use redundant connections to the
Internet like this.
Notice I’ve added some device names and
IP addresses in the 172.16.0.0/24 network
to make things easier to talk about.
Now if this connection fails PC1 can use this
alternate path to the Internet.
This could be, for example, a slower and cheaper
connection that is only used until the main
connection is recovered.
But let’s stop and think about this, because
it’s not so simple.
In this network, let’s say R1’s IP address
172.16.0.254 is configured as the default
gateway.
So that means each PC is configured with the
172.16.0.254 address as its default gateway.
So, anytime these PCs need to send traffic
outside of the local subnet, they will send
it to the default gateway, R1.
But what happens if R1 goes down for some
reason, perhaps a hardware failure?
Fortunately, there is a backup router connected
to the Internet, R2.
But there’s a problem here.
Can you identify the problem?
Pause the video and think about it for a minute.
Okay, the problem is here.
The PCs’ default gateway is still set to
.254, R1’s address.
Although R2 is available as a backup, the
PCs don’t know that R1 is down and that
they should switch to using R2 as their default
gateway.
If a PC needs to send traffic over the Internet,
it will continue to try to send the traffic
to R1.
So, how can we cause R2 to automatically become
the new default gateway if R1 can no longer
be used?
That’s the role of a first-hop redundancy
protocol, an FHRP.
Here’s a brief explanation of FHRPs from
Wikipedia.
‘A first hop redundancy protocol (FHRP)
is a computer networking protocol which is
designed to protect the default gateway used
on a subnetwork by allowing two or more routers
to provide backup for that address; in the
event of failure of an active router, the
backup router will take over the address,
usually within a few seconds.’
The name ‘first-hop’ redundancy protocol
is used because the default gateway is the
‘first hop’, the first router in the path
to whatever destination the PC is sending
traffic to.
Here’s how FHRPs do this.
The two routers share a VIP, a virtual IP
address, for example 172.16.0.252.
You configure the PCs in the network to use
that virtual IP as their default gateway,
instead of the actual IP address of R1.
Now, the routers have to negotiate their roles
with each other.
How do they do that?
They send multicast ‘Hello’ messages to
each other, like this.
Okay, so what roles did they negotiate?
Well, one of them, let’s say R1, will become
the active router.
The other, R2, will become the standby router.
Note that the actual terms, like active and
standby, vary depending on which FHRP is being
used, because as I showed you before there
are a few different FHRPs.
So, R1 is the active, meaning it will act
as the default gateway for the network.
R2 is the standby, meaning it will not function
as the default gateway unless R1 fails.
If R1 does fail, it will automatically take
over the role as default gateway.
So, let’s say we set up our FHRP here in
this network, and now PC1 needs to send some
traffic to a destination in another network.
Here’s what PC1 is thinking.
I need to send traffic to a destination in
another network.
My default gateway is 172.16.0.252, but I
don’t know the MAC address yet.
I will send an ARP request to learn the MAC
address of 172.16.0.252.
I haven’t mentioned ARP in a while in this
course, but remember that it is used to learn
the MAC address of a particular IP address.
In order for PC1 to encapsulate the packet
in a frame destined for the default gateway,
it has to know the default gateway’s MAC
address.
So, PC1 will make an ARP request like this,
saying ‘Hi 172.16.0.252.
This is 172.16.0.1.
What’s your MAC address?’.
Remember that the ARP request message is broadcast.
So, it will be sent over the network like
this, reaching all hosts.
Fortunately spanning tree prevents a broadcast
storm by disabling some of the switch interfaces.
So, both R1 and R2 have received the ARP request,
and they both share the same virtual IP address,
172.16.0.252, the one in the ARP request.
What happens now?
Which will send the ARP reply?
R1 is the active router and R2 is the standby
router, so you can probably guess that R1
will send the ARP reply.
And that is correct.
R1 will send a unicast ARP reply like this.
‘Hi 172.16.0.1.
This is 172.16.0.252.
My MAC address is...’, and then it will
tell PC1 the virtual MAC address.
That’s right, not only is a virtual IP address
used, but a virtual MAC address too.
Each FHRP uses a different virtual MAC address,
and I will introduce them later.
So, the ARP reply is sent to PC1.
Now PC1 knows the MAC address of its default
gateway.
So let’s say PC1 needs to send some traffic
to the IP address 8.8.8.8, which is a Google
server by the way.
What will the source and destination fields
of the frame and packet be?
The source IP will be PC1’s, 172.16.0.1.
The destination IP will be the Google server,
8.8.8.8.
The source MAC will be PC1’s MAC address.
And the destination MAC address will be the
virtual MAC address used by the FHRP.
The frame will be sent to R1, and then the
packet will be sent over the Internet.
Now what if R1 goes down?
There is no default gateway for the network.
But after a few seconds, R2 will think ‘I
haven’t received any ‘Hello’ messages
from R1 recently...I will become the Active
router!’.
So R2 is now the active router.
But how does it tell the other devices to
send traffic to it instead of R1?
Note that the end hosts, the PCs, actually
don’t have to change their ARP tables.
The entry in the PC’s ARP table is like
this, mapping the virtual IP address 172.16.0.252
to the virtual MAC address.
So, what needs to be updated to make traffic
start going through R2?
The answer is the switches.
R2 needs to make the switches update their
MAC address tables.
Remember how switches update their MAC address
table.
When they receive a frame they check the source
MAC address field, and use that to update
the information in the MAC address table.
So, R2 needs to send frames with a source
MAC address of the virtual MAC address.
To do this, it will send ‘gratuitous ARP’
replies.
Gratuitous ARP is probably outside of the
scope of the CCNA, but here’s a very brief
explanation.
Gratuitous ARP messages are ARP replies sent
without being requested.
Normally ARP replies are sent in reply to
an ARP request, but in gratuitous ARP, the
ARP reply messages are sent without receiving
an ARP request.
Here’s another difference between gratuitous
ARP and regular ARP replies.
The frames are broadcast to the MAC address
of all Fs, but normal ARP replies are unicast.
Because they are broadcast, all switches will
receive the frames and update their MAC address
table.
So, R2 will send gratuitous ARPs like this.
They will be broadcast throughout the network,
and again spanning-tree protocol will prevent
a broadcast storm.
The switches will then update their MAC address
tables.
SW2 will learn that it can now reach the virtual
MAC address via this interface, SW1 will learn
the same thing, and so will SW3 and SW4.
Now R2 is the active router, and all of the
switches have updated their MAC address tables.
Let’s say PC1 wants to send traffic to the
same Google server, 8.8.8.8, again.
The frame and packet are exactly the same
as before.
Source IP is PC1’s, Destination IP is the
Google server, source MAC is PC1’s, and
destination MAC is the Virtual MAC.
However, this time the frame will be sent
to R2, which will send the packet out over
the Internet.
Now, what if R1 comes online again?
Will it become the active router once again?
No, it will become the standby router.
Like I said about the DR and BDR in OSPF,
FHRPs are ‘non-preemptive’.
The current active router will not automatically
give up its role, even if the former active
router returns.
However, although this is the default behavior,
you can change this setting to make R1 preempt
R2 and take back its active role automatically,
so R2 will become the standby router again.
Okay, so that was a basic overview of how
first hop redundancy protocols, FHRPs, work.
I haven’t talked about any specific FHRPs
yet, but most of that information applies
to all of them.
Before moving on to explain a few specific
FHRPs, here’s a quick review.
A virtual IP is configured on the two routers,
and a virtual MAC is generated for the virtual
IP.
Each FHRP uses a different format for the
virtual MAC address, I’ll cover those MAC
addresses in the next section.
An active router and a standby router are
elected.
Again, different FHRPs use different terms,
and some support what’s called an ‘active-active’
setup, with two active routers at the same
time, but I’ll explain more later.
Next, end hosts in the network are configured
to use the virtual IP as their default gateway.
The active router replies to ARP requests
using the virtual MAC address, so traffic
destined for other networks will be sent to
it.
It functions as the default gateway for the
network.
If the active router fails, the standby becomes
the next active router.
The new active router will send gratuitous
ARP messages so that switches will update
their MAC address tables.
It now functions as the default gateway for
the network.
If the old active router comes back online,
by default it won’t take back its role as
the active router.
It will become the standby router.
This is like the DR and BDR in OSPF, they
don’t give up their roles automatically
even if another router is configured with
a higher priority.
But, in FHRPs you can configure ‘preemption’,
so that the old active router does take back
its old role if it comes back online.
Okay, sorry for the wall of text.
Before moving on to a few specific FHRPs,
I recommend watching the previous section
once more to make sure you understand the
basics of how FHRPs work.
Now let’s move on.
N ow I’ll give a brief overview of
three major FHRPs.
The functionality of each is very similar,
so this section will be quite brief, but make
sure you learn these details for the exam.
First up, HSRP, Hot Standby Router Protocol.
HSRP is Cisco proprietary, so it only runs
on Cisco devices.
You can’t run it on Juniper routers, for
example.
In HSRP, an active and standby router are
elected.
These are the two terms I used previously,
but you’ll see the next FHRP uses different
terms.
There are two versions of HSRP, version 1
and version 2.
Version 2 adds IPv6 support, and increases
the number of ‘groups’ that can be configured.
You’ll see what a group is when we configure
HSRP later.
In our example today, there was just one subnet,
172.16.0.0/24, and one VLAN.
But in situations with multiple subnets and
VLANs, you’ll need to configure a virtual
IP address for each subnet, because each subnet
needs its own default gateway.
Each of those virtual IPs is configured in
a separate HSRP group.
Anyway, as I said you’ll see how that works
later.
Remember how I explained that the routers
communicate with each other by sending multicast
hello messages?
These are the addresses used.
224.0.0.2 for version 1, and 224.0.0.102 for
version 2.
It may seem not so important, but try to remember
these addresses for the test.
Next up, the virtual MAC address formats.
These are tougher to remember, but make sure
you remember them for the exam.
Use the flashcards, try writing them from
memory, whatever you have to do to remember
them.
So, version 1 uses 0000 0c07 ac, followed
by the group number.
So, in my previous example let’s say I configured
the virtual IP address in group 1.
If using HSRP version 1, what would be virtual
MAC address be?
It’s 0000 0c07 ac01, because the group number
is 1.
Now, HSRP version 2 uses the format 0000 0c9F
Fxxx, again xxx is the group number.
Note that 3 hexadecimal digits are now available
instead of 2, so there are more group numbers
available.
Anyway, if group number 1 is used, what would
the virtual MAC address be in HSRP version
2?
It’s 0000 0c9f f001.
One last point, in a situation with multiple
subnets/VLANs, you can configure a different
active router in each subnet to load balance.
Remember what I said in previous videos about
spanning-tree protocol?
You can configure a different root bridge
in each VLAN so traffic is load balanced over
the switches.
Well, when you configure multiple HSRP groups,
one for each subnet and VLAN, you can configure
a different active router in each subnet and
VLAN.
For example, R1 could be the active router
in VLAN1 and standby in VLAN2, and R2 could
be the standby in VLAN1 and active in VLAN2.
This is probably beyond what you need to know
for the CCNA, but let me briefly demonstrate
the concept.
Let’s say VLAN1 is assigned to hosts in
the 172.16.1.0/24 subnet.
PC1 and PC3 are in VLAN1.
R1 and R2 have their own IP addresses in VLAN1,
but they also share the virtual IP 172.16.1.252,
which is used as the default gateway of the
subnet.
R1 is the active router and R2 is the standby
router.
Then, 172.16.2.0/24 is the subnet for VLAN2.
PC2 and PC4 are in VLAN2.
R1 and R2 have their own IP addresses in VLAN2,
connecting to the switches using ‘router-on-a-stick’.
They also share the virtual IP address 172.16.2.252,
which is used as the default gateway for the
subnet.
R2 is the active router and R1 is the standby
router.
Now traffic can be load balanced over the
two paths, VLAN1 using R1 and VLAN2 using
R2 as the default gateway of the subnet, and
each subnet has a standby router waiting if
the active router fails.
So, that’s a basic overview of HSRP.
Although it can’t load balance within a
single subnet, you can configure a different
active router in each subnet so that traffic
is load balanced between the routers.
Let’s move on to the next FHRP.
Next up is VRRP, Virtual Router Redundancy
Protocol.
Unlike HSRP, it’s an open standard, so it
can be run on devices from any maker.
Cisco routers run it too, so you can use either
HSRP or VRRP.
Honestly, in terms of functionality they are
nearly identical, with just a few differences.
Instead of an active and standby router, a
master and backup router are elected.
The function is the same, just the names are
different.
Master is equivalent to HSRP’s active, and
backup is equivalent to HSRP’s standby.
The IPv4 multicast address used is different
as well, 224.0.0.18.
Again, use the flashcards to remember little
details like this.
The virtual MAC address format is different,
too.
0000 5e00 01, followed by the VRRP group number.
Let’s try a bit more of a challenge.
What if I configured VRRP group 200, instead
of group 1.
What would the virtual MAC address be?
You have to convert 200 to hexadecimal.
Pause the video to try that, do a Google search
if you don’t remember how hexadecimal works.
Okay, the answer is 0000 5e00 01c8.
Hexadecimal c8 is equal to 200 in decimal.
Just like HSRP, although VRRP can’t perform
load-balancing for hosts in a single subnet,
it can load balance between different subnets
by configuring a different master router in
each subnet.
Here’s the same diagram as before, showing
load-balancing between the two subnets.
All that’s different is that ‘master’
and ‘backup’ are used instead of ‘active’
and ‘standby’.
Before moving on, I just want to mention one
point separate from FHRPs.
Notice that all hosts in VLAN1 are in the
same subnet, 172.16.1.0/24, and all hosts
in VLAN2 are in the same subnet, 172.16.2.0/24.
This is how subnets and VLANs are used.
Subnets divide the network at Layer 3, and
VLANs divide the network at Layer 2, and they
work together, each subnet being its own VLAN.
You might have noticed that throughout this
course, but I just wanted to point it out.
Before moving on to the last FHRP, here’s
a comparison chart of HSRP and VRRP.
In terms of functionality, they’re nearly
the same.
But remember the different terminology, multicast
IP addresses, and virtual MAC addresses.
Also remember that HSRP is Cisco proprietary,
whereas VRRP is an open standard that can
run on any network device that supports it.
Next up, we’ll take a look at GLBP.
The final FHRP you should be aware of is GLBP,
Gateway Load Balancing Protocol.
This one is a bit different than HSRP and
VRRP.
Like HSRP, it is Cisco proprietary, it only
runs on Cisco devices.
Here’s the big difference: it load balances
among multiple routers within a single subnet.
For example, if PC1 and PC2 are both in VLAN1,
PC1 can use R1 as its default gateway, and
PC2 can use R2 as its default gateway.
This is different than HSRP and VRRP, in which
all hosts in the same subnet must use the
same router as the default gateway for the
subnet.
In GLBP, a single AVG, Active Virtual Gateway,
is elected for the subnet.
Then, up to four AVFs, active virtual forwarders,
are assigned by the AVG, and the AVG itself
can be an AVF also.
Each AVF acts as the default gateway for a
portion of the hosts in the subnet.
So, load balancing is achieved within a single
subnet.
The multicast IPv4 address is 224.0.0.102,
same as HSRP version 2.
The virtual MAC address format is 0007 b400,
followed by the GLBP group number and the
AVF number.
For example, what is the virtual MAC address
of AVF number 1 in GLBP group 1?
It’s 0007 b400 0101.
So, the functions of GLBP are a bit more complicated
than HSRP and VRRP, but for the purposes of
the CCNA remember that GLBP allows multiple
active routers to load balance traffic within
a single subnet, and remember the multicast
IP address and the virtual MAC address format.
It might seem not so important, but for the
CCNA exam definitely remember the IP and MAC
addresses.
Here’s that chart again, with GLBP filled
in.
If you remember the basic characteristics
of HSRP, VRRP, and GLBP, and memorize the
information in this chart, you’ll be ready
to answer any questions about FHRPs on the
CCNA exam.
However, as a little extra, I’m going to
show you some very basic configurations for
HSRP, so we can try it out in a lab in the
next video.
Although configuring HSRP isn’t part of
the CCNA exam topics, getting some hands-on
experience will help you understand how it
works.
So let’s do some basic configurations for
HSRP.
To fit everything on the page and show the
CLI at the same time I’ve simplified the
network.
We’ll be focusing on configuring R1 and
R2 to use HSRP to provide a redundant default
gateway address for the 172.16.0.0/24 subnet.
I’ve already configured all of the interface
IP addresses, so we just need to configure
HSRP.
Note that I’m using .254 as the virtual
IP this time, instead of .252.
So, let’s get started configuring R1.
HSRP is configured directly on the interface,
G0/0 in this case.
Make sure you configure it on the correct
interface, the one connected to the network
it is acting as the default gateway for.
HSRP is configured with the STANDBY command.
I used the question mark to see what options
are available.
There are many more than this, but the one
we want to use is this one, group number.
Note that HSRP version 1 is the default, so
the range of groups available is 0 through
255.
If using HSRP version 2, this range would
be 0 through 4095.
Actually, let me show you how to change it
to version 2.
The command is STANDBY VERSION 2.
If I check the STANDBY command again, you
can see that the group number range is now
0 through 4095.
This simple network is using just a single
VLAN, VLAN1, so I chose HSRP group number
1.
You don’t have to do this, it’s not a
rule, but I like to match the HSRP group number
to the VLAN number used for the subnet.
Note that this group number does have to match
between the two routers, that’s important.
So, I used the question mark again to check
the options available here.
We’ll go over three.
IP, PREEMPT, and PRIORITY.
First up, you configure the virtual IP with
this command, STANDBY, group number, IP, followed
by the IP address you want to use as the default
gateway.
Then I used the PRIORITY command, as you can
see the range is 0 to 255, and I set R1’s
priority to 200.
What does priority do?
It’s used to determine which router will
be the active router.
The active router is determined in this order.
First, the router with the highest HSRP priority
in the group will become the active router.
The default priority is 100.
If the routers have the same priority, the
router with the highest IP address will become
the active router.
In this case R1’s IP address, 172.16.0.253,
is higher than R2’s IP address, 172.16.0.252.
So, even without configuring the priority
R1 would still become the active router, but
I configured it anyway.
Finally, I enabled ‘preemption’.
Enabling the PREEMPT command causes the router
to take the role of active router, even if
another router already has the role, although
the preempting router must have a higher priority
or IP address.
For example, let’s say R1 is the active
router and R2 is the standby router.
If an error causes R1 to restart, R2 will
become the active router.
When R1 comes back online, if preemption is
not enabled R2 will remain the active router
and R1 will be the standby.
However, with preemption enabled R1 will take
back its role as the active router, because
it has the higher priority.
Note that you only need to configure preemption
on the router that you want to become the
active router.
Even if I don’t configure preemption on
R2, R1 will still be able to preempt R2 and
take back the active role.
Now let’s configure R2.
First up, I enabled HSRP version 2 on R2’s
G0/0 interface.
This is important, HSRP version 1 and version
2 are not compatible, so if R1 uses version
2, R2 must use version 2 also or there will
be problems.
Next I configured the same virtual IP as on
R1, 172.16.0.254.
The next two commands, setting the priority
and preemption, are actually unnecessary.
R1 already has a higher priority than R2,
and preemption doesn’t need to be enabled
on the standby router.
But I configured them anyway, so the configuration
is consistent between the two routers, but
it doesn’t really matter.
Finally let’s take a look at the output
of SHOW STANDBY.
This is the output from both R1 and R2, let’s
just take a look at R1.
First up, notice the HSRP group number of
1 and that version 2 is being used.
The state is active, because R1 is the active
router.
Here the virtual IP address we configured
is displayed.
These two lines display the virtual MAC address,
it’s the default one.
Here are the HSRP timers.
We didn’t configure these so they are the
default values.
Preemption is enabled, because we configured
STANDBY 1 PREEMPT.
Active router is local, because R1 itself
is the active router.
The standby router is 172.16.0.252, which
is R2.
And finally here is the priority value of
200 that we configured.
If you want to take a look at the output of
the command for R2 also, pause the video.
Okay, that’s all we’ll cover about HSRP
configuration, in the lab video we’ll get
more hands on.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s review
what we covered in this video.
First I gave an introduction to the purpose
and basic function of FHRPs, which is to provide
a redundant default gateway for a subnet.
Then, I briefly introduced three different
FHRPs, HSRP, VRRP, and GLBP.
Make sure to learn the basic characteristics
of each, and use the chart to memorize their
multicast IP addresses and virtual MAC addresses.
Then I introduced some very basic HSRP configuratons.
You probably won’t be asked about these
commands on the exam, but getting some hands
on practice will help you understand the topic,
so in the next video we’ll do a simple HSRP
lab, taking a look at preemption and such.
Here are the commands we used.
STANDBY VERSION 2, to configure the router
to use HSRP version 2.
STANDBY IP, to set the virtual IP address
that will be used as the default gateway.
STANDBY PRIORITY, to help control which router
becomes the active router.
And STANDBY PREEMPT, to cause the active router
to take its role back if it recovers from
a failure.
Remember to watch until the end of today’s
quiz for a bonus question from Boson ExSim
for CCNA, by far the best practice exams you
can get for the CCNA.
You can get Boson ExSim from the link in the
video description.
Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which of the following is an HSRP version
1 virtual MAC address?
A, B, C, or D. Pause the video now to think
about your answer.
The answer is D, 0000 0c07 acab.
The HSRP version 1 virtual MAC address format
is 0000 0c07 ac, followed by the group number,
in this case AB.
What is AB in decimal?
It’s 171, so in this case HSRP group number
171 was used.
As for the incorrect answers, options A and
C are HSRP version 2 virtual MAC addresses,
and option B does not follow any FHRP virtual
MAC address format.
Let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following is a VRRP virtual MAC
address?
A, B, C, or D. Pause the video to think about
your answer.
The answer is A, 0000 5e00 010a.
The VRRP virtual MAC address format is 0000
5e00 01, followed by the group number.
What is hexadecimal 0a in decimal?
It’s 10, so in this case VRRP was configured
using group number 10.
Option B is a GLBP virtual MAC address, option
C is an HSRP version 2 virtual MAC address,
and option D does not follow any FHRP virtual
MAC address format.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following are valid VRRP router
roles?
Select two.
A, active.
B, backup.
C, active virtual gateway.
D, master.
E, standby.
Or F, active virtual forwarder.
Pause the video to think about your answers.
The answers are B, backup and D, master.
A, active and E, standby are HSRP router roles.
C, active virtual gateway and F, active virtual
forwarder, are GLBP router roles.
VRRP uses master and backup routers.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
When the HSRP standby router becomes the new
active router, what kind of messages does
it send?
Select the best answer.
A, HSRP hello messages.
B, gratuitous ARP messages.
C, ARP request messages.
Or D, ARP reply messages.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, gratuitous ARP.
Some other answers are not totally incorrect,
but are not the best answer, let me explain.
In Cisco’s questions, at the end it usually
says ‘select the best answer’.
That’s because some of the options aren’t
totally incorrect, however they aren’t the
best answer.
For example, option A is ‘HSRP Hello’.
Routers using HSRP always send Hello messages.
So, when the HSRP standby router becomes the
new active router, it will continue sending
HSRP hello messages, so A isn’t totally
incorrect.
However B is the better answer, because it
only sends these gratuitous ARP messages when
it becomes the new active router.
How about D, ARP reply?
I told you that gratuitous ARP messages are
a kind of ARP reply, so D isn’t totally
incorrect.
However, B is the better answer because it’s
more specific.
So, when taking the CCNA exam make sure you’re
selecting the best answer, even if some of
the other options seem like they might be
correct.
Let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following statements accurately
describes HSRP?
Select the best answer.
A, it allows you to configure a different
default gateway address on each end host.
B, it allows multiple routers to load-balance
traffic for hosts in a subnet.
C, it provides a redundant default gateway
address for hosts in a subnet.
Or D, each router selects a unique virtual
IP and MAC address.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, it provides a redundant gateway
for hosts in a subnet.
Although you can configure a different active
router in each subnet to provide load balancing,
it doesn’t provide load balancing for hosts
in a single subnet.
To do that, you would need to use Cisco’s
GLBP, gateway load balancing protocol.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Let’s move on to a bonus question in Boson
ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson ExSim practice
question.
By the way, I noticed that you can zoom in
on ExSim, so hopefully this is easier for
you to read now.
So here's the question.
Why of the following statements are true regarding
HSRP?
Select two choices.
Okay, so I'll let you read these options yourself.
Pause the video here, read the options, and
select the two correct choices.
Okay, hopefully you got the answers.
So let's check them.
A, one router is elected as the master router,
and all other routers are placed in the backup
state.
That is incorrect, master and backup, that
terminology is used for VRRP, not HSRP.
B, in an HSRP group only one virtual IP address
is used, but multiple virtual MAC addresses
are used.
That is also incorrect.
In a single HSRP group only one virtual MAC
address is used.
Okay, C. One router is elected as the active
router and another router is elected as the
standby router.
That is correct, I believe, about HSRP.
D, in an HSRP group only one virtual IP address
and one virtual MAC address is used.
That is correct also.
I think, but let's check option E as well.
All routers in an HSRP group can participate
by forwarding a portion of the traffic.
Okay, that is not true for HSRP, but it is
true for GLBP.
Okay, so I think C and D are correct.
Let's click on show answer.
And that is correct.
So here is Boson's explanation, quite detailed.
You can pause the video here if you want to
read it, I highly recommend you do.
They also have a reference to some Cisco documentation
here that you can read online for free.
And it states the category of the exam topics
list, which is IP Connectivity.
Okay, so that's an example question from Boson
ExSim.
Boson ExSim is a great set of practice exams
for the CCNA.
I used it when studing for my CCNA, and I
also used ExSim for CCNP when I studied for
my CCNP, and I highly recommend them.
So if you want to get a copy of Boson ExSim
for CCNA, follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Sign up for my mailing list via the link in
the description, and I’ll send you all of
the flashcards and packet tracer lab files
for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Recently I’ve noticed an increase in the
number of channel members, and I’m so thankful
to all of you, both JCNA and JCNP-level members.
Your support helps me keep making and releasing
these videos every week, so I’m really grateful
for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, September
21st 2020, if you signed up recently and your
name isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll
be in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.