Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we’ll take a look at Wireshark.
I have shown you Wireshark a couple times
in the course, but today I’ll spend a little
bit more time on it.
Although there is a lot you can learn about
Wireshark, it’s quite easy to get started
using it.
Network engineers use it as a tool in their
job all the time, and it’s also a fantastic
study tool.
Using Packet Tracer’s ‘simulation’ mode
you can analyze packets to some extent, but
not at the same level as Wireshark.
Packet Tracer is a network simulator, but
Wireshark lets you capture and analyze real
network traffic.
Up here you can see the packets as they are
sent or received by the network interface
you are capturing traffic from, and if you
click on a packet you can see more details
down here.
Note that this kind of software is called
‘packet capture’ software.
Packet is just a general term we use, it doesn’t
mean it only captures the Layer 3 PDU.
As you can see here, the entire frame is indeed
captured.
To download Wireshark, go to wireshark.org.
It’s totally free, so you really should
get it.
At the end of this demonstration I’ll give
you a few basic tasks to try out in Wireshark,
so you’ll need to download it if you want
to do them.
Usually in my lab videos I give a shoutout
to Boson NetSim, Boson’s amazing network
simulator with a ton of guided practice labs.
Since I’m not doing a regular configuration
lab this time, I decided to let you know about
Boson’s CCNA courseware, which they released
recently.
Basically, this is Boson’s complete course
for the CCNA.
What do you get in the courseware?
You get the curriculum, which is the main
CCNA course in PDF format.
You get a PDF lab guide, and on top of that
a lab pack you can do in NetSim.
These are not the labs included in NetSim
for CCNA, these are completely new and unique
labs made for the courseware.
Here’s the table of contents for the curriculum,
covering everything you need to know for the
CCNA.
I always recommend using multiple resources
to study for the exam, and I think Boson’s
courseware is a great option.
I didn’t use their courseware for the previous
edition of the CCNA, but I did use their CCNP
courseware to study for my exams and it was
excellent.
If you want to get Boson’s courseware, follow
the link in the video description.
You can download a sample from their website.
Okay, back to Wireshark.
First up I’m just going to show you a brief
video of me using Wireshark to capture traffic
being sent and received by the network interface
of my PC.
When the capture starts you’ll see there’s
already a lot of network traffic going through
the interface.
Then I open a YouTube page and start watching
a video, and you’ll see some more traffic.
Okay, let’s just watch the video, it’s
about 45 seconds long, and then I’ll walk
through an actual analysis of some of the
traffic.
Okay, so that was a lot of traffic that went
passing by.
Let’s analyze some of it.
Notice that in Wireshark you are able to filter
output.
There are many ways you can do so.
This video isn’t about how to master Wireshark,
so I won’t cover anything like that.
Just notice that I filtered by the TCP port
number.
If you do want to learn more about Wireshark,
David Bombal has a fantastic course on Udemy,
and also a free Wireshark and ethical hacking
course here on YouTube, check them out if
you’re curious.
Okay, notice the first message here, under
‘protocol’ you can see that TCP is the
Layer 4 protocol being used.
Under ‘info’ you can see the source and
destination ports.
From 62652 to 443 in the first message, and
reversed in the second message, which is the
reply.
What is 62652?
It’s the random source port my PC selected
from the ephemeral port range.
How about 443?
That’s HTTPS, Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Secure, it’s used to access webpages.
Look here, do you recognize this series of
messages?
SYN, SYN-ACK, followed by ACK.
That’s the TCP 3-way handshake.
So, in these first three messages my PC and
the remote server established a TCP connection.
You can also see the sequence number, acknowledgment number, and window length.
Remember that I said the initial sequence
number is randomly selected?
You might be thinking it’s a big coincidence
that 0 was randomly selected as the sequence
number.
In Wireshark it is displayed as 0 here to
make it easier to look at and understand,
but that’s not the actual sequence number.
When we look further at the details of the
segment you’ll see the real sequence number.
So, sequence number 0 is acknowledged with
1, there’s the forward acknowledgment I
told you about.
Then my PC sends sequence number 1.
Once again, these aren’t the real sequence
numbers, Wireshark just displays them like
this to make it easier to look at and analyze
the data exchange.
Then there is the actual exchange of data
here.
Notice that most of these display SSL in the
protocol column.
SSL is what gives the security to HTTPS, Hypertext
Transfer Protocol Secure.
TCP is still being used, but Wireshark displays
SSL in the column here.
Finally, you can see the exchange of FINs
and ACKs to terminate the connection at the
end.
You probably noticed that the flags are a
little different than I introduced in the
lecture, there is an extra ACK in the first
and third messages.
There are some nuances to the connection termination
process which you don’t need to worry about
at the CCNA level.
I recommend just remembering the basic FIN,
ACK, FIN, ACK sequence.
Now let’s briefly look inside one of those
segments.
This is the very first SYN message at the
beginning of the three-way handshake.
First up, notice that the segment is of course
encapsulated in an Ethernet frame and IP packet.
We’re just looking deeper than we did before,
but don’t forget about Layers 2 and 3.
Okay, I want to point out the sequence number
here.
Notice that ‘0’ is the relative sequence
number.
Wireshark does this to make it easier to analyze
the traffic.
Below you can see the real sequence number.
As you can probably imagine, it is much harder
to analyze when using sequence and acknowledgment
numbers like 1 billion 224 million 315 thousand
781.
Okay, there are just a couple other things
I wanted to point out.
Because this is a SYN message, under the ‘flags’
section you can see that the SYN bit is set,
it’s 1.
All of the other flags are not set, they are
0.
Finally, you can see the TCP window size down
here.
Okay, before wrapping up this brief demonstration
let’s look at a UDP segment.
First up, notice that this is a DNS, Domain
Name System, message.
This is from my PC to a DNS server.
So, what will the destination port be?
As you can see here, my PC selected a random
source port from the ephemeral range, and
used 53 as the destination port, because that’s
the port number DNS uses.
Within the segment you can indeed see that
a DNS message is encapsulated inside.
This is a DNS query message, you’ll learn
more about DNS later in the course.
That’s all I wanted to point out about UDP,
as you already know it’s much simpler than
TCP.
Finally, here’s a little bit of homework
for you to get familiar with Wireshark.
You don’t have to do this, of course, but
it won’t take too much time.
First, download Wireshark from wireshark.org.
Then use it to capture network traffic sent
and received by your PC.
Visit some websites while Wireshark is running.
Then stop the Wireshark capture.
Check out the packet captures, and find a
TCP three-way handshake, a TCP connection
establishment.
Then find a TCP four-way handshake, a TCP
connection termination.
Again, if you really want to learn how to
use Wireshark I recommend checking out David
Bombal’s free videos on YouTube or getting
his Wireshark course on Udemy.
I’m no Wireshark expert myself, David Bombal
is much more knowledgeable about it than I
am.
Okay, that’s all for the video, I hope it
was interesting to look inside some packet
captures and see some of the things we studied
in the lecture video.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Benjamin, Deepak, Tshepiso, Justin,
Loki, TheGunguy, Nil, Alex, Prakaash, Nasir,
Erlison, Apogee, Wasseem, Marko, Florian,
Daming, Kone, Joshua, Jhilmar, Samil, Ed,
Value, John, Funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Gerrard,
Joyce, Marek, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan,
Mark, Yousif, Sidi, Boson Software, Charlesetta,
Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, September
29th 2020, if you signed up recently and your
name isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll
be in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.