Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like
these videos, please subscribe to follow along
with the series. Also, please like and leave
a comment, and share the video to help spread
this free series of videos. Thanks for your
help. Also, remember to sign up via the link
in the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out. It’s a network simulator
like packet tracer, but it’s even better,
and it includes all of these guided labs to
not only help you get hands-on practice configuring
and troubleshooting, but also deepen your
understanding of the exam topics. I used it
myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you. If you want to get your own
copy of NetSim, please follow the link in
the video description.
In today’s video we’ll practice configuring
IPv6 static routes in this network to enable
PC1 and PC2 to ping each other via the R1,
R3 path, and also configure a backup route
via R2. The IPv6 addresses on the routers
have been preconfigured, but not the PCs,
so we are going to use SLAAC to configure
IPv6 addresses on the PCs.
Before that, we must enable IPv6 routing on
each router. If IPv6 routing isn’t enabled,
these routers won’t route IPv6 traffic,
and they also won’t send the NDP router
advertisement messages that are necessary
for SLAAC to work. So let’s quickly enable
that on each router, R1 first.
ENABLE. CONF T. IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING. Next
R2. ENABLE. CONF T. IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING.
Finally R3. ENABLE. CONF T. IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING.
Okay, always remember that step when configuring
IPv6. Now I’ll go on PC1. From the config
tab, I’ll set the default gateway by clicking
on ‘automatic’. As you can see, PC1 automatically
set its default gateway. This is a link-local
IPv6 address, so it must be R1’s address.
It learned it from R1’s NDP router advertisement
messages. Next I’ll select PC1’s FastEthernet0
interface, and you can see packet tracer automatically
enabled SLAAC for PC1 and it configured an
IPv6 address. It learned this network prefix
from R1, and the second half, the interface
ID, was generated using EUI-64. Okay, let’s
do the same on PC2. From the config tab, tell
PC2 to automatically learn its default gateway.
There it is, and let’s look at its FastEthernet0
interface. As you can see, it automatically
learned the network prefix from R3 and also
used EUI-64 to generate an interface ID. Later,
when I try a ping from PC1 to PC2, I’m going
to need to copy this address, but I can’t
highlight it here. So, I’ll go to the CLI
of PC2, and use the command IPCONFIG to view
PC2’s IPv6 address here. Okay, I’ll copy
this address later when I try to ping from
PC1 to PC2.
Okay, now let’s get to the main part of
this lab, configuring IPv6 static routes.
We need to configure routes to allow PC1 and
PC2 to ping each other. The path from R1 to
R3 should be the main path, and the serial
connections to R2 should only be used as a
backup. So let’s configure routes on R1
first.
So R1 needs two routes to R3’s internal
LAN, the main route directly to R3 and a backup
route to R2. Let’s configure the main route.
IPV6 ROUTE 2001:db8:0:3::/64, that’s the
destination, now we can enter either the next
hop, or both the exit interface and next hop.
As I said in the lecture video, on an Ethernet
interface you can’t use just the exit interface,
a directly attached static route. You can
only use recursive or fully-specified static
routes. I’ll use fully specified routes.
G0/1 2001:db8:0:13::2.
Okay, that’s the main route. Now our backup
route via R2. I only enabled IPv6 on the serial
interfaces, I didn’t manually configure
any IPv6 addresses, so the routers only have
link-local addresses. So, I need to know R2’s
link-local address to use as the next hop.
I’ll go on R2. DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, there’s the link-local address of
serial0/0/0, I’ll copy it, and return to
R1. Now I’ll use the up arrow, delete the
interface and next hop, and now the exit interface
is s0/0/0, and I’ll paste R2’s link-local
address as the next hop. Remember, when using
a link-local address as the next hop you have
to use a fully specified route, you have to
include the exit-interface, too. But this
route isn’t complete yet, we want to make
sure this is only used as a backup. How can
we do that? We can configure it as a floating
static route. So, I will specify the administrative
distance here, let’s make it 5. In Cisco
IOS a normal static route has an AD of 1,
so we just need to make the AD higher than
1. Okay, let’s check the routing table.
DO SHOW IPV6 ROUTE. Okay, so you can only
see the route via R3, but let’s check the
running config to make sure R1 has that floating
static route. DO SHOW RUN, pipe, INCLUDE IPV6
ROUTE. Notice I used the pipe with INCLUDE
to filter it only to lines that include IPV6
ROUTE. Okay, now we can see both of the routes.
That’s all for R1. Now, I’m going to configure
R2’s routes next, so let me get the link-local
address of R1’s s0/0/0 interface first.
DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF. Okay, I’ll
copy that to use as the next hop for R2.
So, let’s go back to R2. R2 needs a route
to R1’s LAN and a route to R3’s LAN. I’ll
configure the route to R1’s LAN first. IPV6
ROUTE 2001:db8:0:1::/64 S0/0/0, and now I’ll
paste R1’s link-local address. Okay, next
up is the route to R3’s LAN. First I’ll
go on R3 and get the link-local address of
its S0/0/0 interface. DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE
BRIEF. There it is, let me copy that. Now
I’ll go back to R2 and configure the route.
IPV6 ROUTE 2001:db8:0:3::/64 s0/0/1, and I’ll
paste in R3’s link-local address as the
next hop. Let’s check R2’s routing table.
DO SHOW IPV6 ROUTE. Okay, it’s got the two
static routes we just configured, that’s
all for R2. But before going to R3, let’s
get the link-local address of R2’s S0/0/1
interface. DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF. Okay,
I’ll copy that address.
Finally, let’s configure R3’s routes.
First I’ll configure the main route via
R1. IPV6 ROUTE 2001:db8:0:1::/64 G0/1 2001:db8:0:13::1.
Note that you don’t have to use fully specified
routes like I do, you can use just the next
hop. Okay, now the backup route via R2. I’ll
use the up arrow, delete the interface and
next hop, and now the interface will be S0/0/0,
I’ll paste in R2’s link-local address,
and finally set the AD to 5. Okay, that’s
everything, PC1 should be able to ping PC2,
and there is a backup route incase the link
between R1 and R3 fails.
Let’s try that ping. I’ll go to PC2 first
to copy its IP address. Next I’ll go on
to the CLI of PC1, and let’s try that ping
to PC2. PING, and I’ll paste in PC2’s
IP address. Okay, PC1 is able to ping PC2.
Let’s try a traceroute to see which path
it is taking. On a windows PC the command
is TRACERT, but if you’re doing this command
on a Cisco device you’ll have to type it
out fully like this, TRACEROUTE. These packet
tracer PCs are like windows PCs, so its just
TRACERT, and again I’ll paste PC2’s address.
Okay, it goes to the default gateway, then
13::2, which is R3, and then the destination.
Okay, let’s unplug that cable between R1
and R3. To delete the cable, click this icon
in packet tracer, then click the cable. Okay,
now it’s deleted. Let’s try that ping
again from PC1. I’ll use the up arrow, and
let’s try it. Okay, it works. How about
a traceroute? As you can see, the traceroute
is having trouble at the second hop, at R2.
That’s because R2 only has link-local addresses,
which aren’t routable. But if we wait a
bit we see a reply from R3, and then the destination
PC2. Don’t worry about that, the ping is
still working, and the PCs have no problems
reaching each other. It’s no problem if
PC1 can’t reach every single router in the
path to the destination. Okay, in this lab
we configured IPv6 static routes. That’s
all for this lab.
Okay, here's today's Boson NetSim practice
lab. This lab is configuring IPv6 2. Here's
the objective. Configure a simulated network
with IPv6 addresses on physical interfaces
and loopback interfaces. Your implementation
should enable router interfaces to ping IPv6
addresses across routers and across IPv6 subnets.
And you will configure IPv6 addressing and
Routing Information Protocol, RIP, for IPv6.
So, you will configure RIP for IPv6 in this
lab. As I have said before, dynamic routing
protocols for IPv6 aren't actually part of
the CCNA exam topics list. But the configuration
is actually quite simple, so let's give it
a try. And you can check down here in the
command summary, which commands you need to
know to complete this lab. Okay, here are
the lab tasks. Task 1, configure IPv6 addresses.
Task 2, enable IPv6 RIP routing, and Task
3 configure IPv6 between Router1 and Router3.
So, for this lab demonstration I actually
completed Task 1, I configured IPv6 addresses
on Router3 and Router4. I configured 2 loopback
interfaces, as you can see here in the CLI
of Router3, loopback6, I configured IPv6 addresses.
And same on Router4, loopback6, IPv6 addresses.
So finally, just this last step in task 1,
step 10. From Router4, try to ping Router3's
global unicast serial 0/1 IPv6 address. So,
that should work, let's try. PING 2001:1:3:1::1.
Oh, I am in interface configuration mode.
I'll just exit out of there and try that once
again. Okay, the ping works. And then it says
to try to ping Router3's global unicast loopback6
IPv6 address. So let's try that. I'll change
this to a 2. And the ping is not working.
So, why is that? Router4 can ping the directly
connected interface here, but not the loopback
interface in Router3. And the answer as to
why that is is pretty simple. SHOW IPV6 ROUTE
here on Router4. And there is no route to
the 2001:1:3:2 network which Router3's loopback
interface is in. So Router4 simply doesn't
know about that network. So we could configure
a static route on Router4 and then a static
route on Router3 to Router4's loopback interface.
But in this lab we are not going to do that,
we are going to use RIPng, RIP next generation.
So let's go on to Task 2. On Router3 and Router4,
globally enable RIP for IPv6. Name the process
boson. So we haven't covered RIPng configuration
in the course yet, and we won't because it's
not actually in the exam topics list, but
you can check how to do that here. IPV6 ROUTER
RIP process-name. So it said to use a process
name of boson. IPV6 ROUTER RIP boson. Okay,
and then Router3. IPV6 ROUTER RIP boson. Okay,
that's it. Let me just check, DO SHOW IPV6
PROTOCOLS. Okay, IPv6 routing protocol is
'rip boson'. That doesn't mean 'rest in peace
boson', by the way, Boson is alive and well.
Okay, step 2. Issue the SHOW IPV6 ROUTE command
on Router3. What RIP routes are being advertised?
Why? Okay, DO SHOW IPV6 ROUTE. Okay, I don't
see any RIP routes. Why is that? Well that's
because Router4 and also on Router3, we haven't
enabled RIPng directly on the interfaces yet.
We've enabled RIP, the RIP process, on the
router, but it's still not activated on any
interfaces. Okay, on Router4 try to ping the
IPv6 address on Router3's loopback6 interface.
Okay, I'll try that but I can tell you now
that the ping will not succeed. And indeed
it does not because Router3 isn't advertising
any RIP routes yet. Okay, so now we are going
to enable RIP on the interfaces. So you can
see the command, how to do that up here. IPV6
RIP process-name ENABLE, on the interface.
So, on Router4 that is serial0/0 first. IPV6
RIP boson ENABLE. Okay, that was it. And then
the loopback6 interface. IPV6 RIP boson ENABLE.
Okay that's all for R4. Now let's do it on
R3. INTERFACE S0/1. IPv6 RIP boson ENABLE.
And on loopback6. Okay, that should be it.
Let's go back to task 2. Allow time for the
network to converge. So RIP can be kind of
slow, so we gotta wait for them to learn the
routes. And then issue the SHOW IPV6 ROUTE
command on Router3. Do you see a route from
Router3 to Router4's loopback6 interface?
Hopefully that was enough time, let's check.
DO SHOW IPV6 ROUTE. And yes, this should be
Router4's loopback6 interface. On Router4,
attempt to ping Router3's loopback interface.
Okay let's try that. DO PING 2001:1:3:2::1.
Okay, and the ping works. So that means Router4
also has a route to Router3's loopback interface.
And here it is. Right there. Okay, on Router3
issue the SHOW IPV6 PROTOCOLS command. You
should note that Router3 is sending and receiving
updates on the serial0/1 interface by using
the 'rip boson' process. Okay, we saw that
command earlier but let's check it again now.
IPv6 routing protocol is rip boson, and there
it is. Note that the loopback6 interface isn't
displayed, just the serial interface. Okay,
so in task 3 you would go on to configure
IPv6 here between Router1 and Router3, but
for today's lab demonstration we'll leave
it here. So, if you want to get a copy of
Boson NetSim for yourself, please follow the
link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members. To join,
please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to O J, Magrathea, TheGunguy,
l33america, Brandon, Njabulo, Benjamin, Tshepiso,
Justin, Nil, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Apogee,
Wasseem, Marko, Flodo, Daming, Joshua, Jhilmar,
Samil, Ed, Value, John, Funnydart, Scott,
Hassan, Marek, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Mark,
Yousif, Sidi, Boson Software, Devin, Lito,
Yonatan, and Vance. Sorry if I pronounced
your name incorrectly, but thank you so much
for your support. This is the list of JCNP-level
members at the time of recording by the way,
November 8th 2020, if you signed up recently
and your name isn’t on here don’t worry,
you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please subscribe to
the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA. If you want to leave a tip,
check the links in the description. I'm also
a Brave verified publisher and accept BAT,
or Basic Attention Token, tips via the Brave
browser. That's all for now.