Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover two Layer 2 discovery
protocols, CDP and LLDP.
You might not have heard of a Layer 2 discovery
protocol before, but I’ll explain what they
are in this video.
CDP and LLDP are exam topic 2.3, which says
you must be able to configure and verify Layer
2 discovery protocols CDP and LLDP.
CDP and LLDP are important topics for the
CCNA, but there’s not as much information
to absorb compared to topics like ACLs, IPv6,
and OSPF.
So, hopefully this video will be a little
easier to get through.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll give a brief overview of Layer
2 discovery protocols.
Then I’ll cover Cisco Discovery Protocol,
CDP.
Finally I’ll cover Link Layer Discovery
Protocol, LLDP.
CDP and LLDP are very similar in terms of
function and configuration, but there are
some key differences.
Watch until the end of today’s video for
a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA.
ExSim simulates the style and difficulty of
the real CCNA exam better than any other practice
exams, and I highly recommend ExSim to anyone
preparing for the CCNA.
Let’s get started with a brief intro to
Layer 2 discovery protocols.
Layer 2 discovery protocols such as CDP and
LLDP share information with, and discover
information about, neighboring (connected)
devices.
They are called ‘Layer 2’ discovery protocols
because the protocols themselves operate at
Layer 2, they don’t use IP addresses.
We’ll look at some Wireshark captures later,
and you’ll see that there are no IP packets
inside of the frames sent by CDP and LLDP.
Although they are Layer 2 discovery protocols,
they can be used to share layer 3 information
such as IP addresses too.
The shared information includes host name,
IP address, device type, etc.
CDP is a Cisco proprietary protocol, developed
by Cisco for Cisco devices.
LLDP is an industry standard protocol, IEEE
802.1AB.
So, if your network uses only Cisco devices
CDP is fine.
However if there is a mix of vendors, for
example Cisco routers, Juniper switches, and
Palo Alto firewalls, you will have to use
LLDP if you want to use a Layer 2 discovery
protocol in your network.
However, because these protocols share information
about the devices in the network, they can
be considered a security risk and are often
not used.
It’s up to the network engineer or admin
to decide if they want to use them in the
network or not.
At my workplace, for example, we always disable
these protocols, but I’m sure many networks
make use of them.
To demonstrate how these protocols work, here
are two devices, R1 and SW1, directly connected.
R1 will periodically send frames to SW1, telling
it information like R1’s hostname, device
type, interface ID, IP address, etc.
SW1 will do the same, periodically sending
frames to R1.
Note that SW1 doesn’t include an IP address
in the information it sends to R1, because
it’s a switch.
Its interface doesn’t have an IP address.
So let’s move on to talk about CDP specifically.
To repeat, CDP is a Cisco proprietary protocol.
It is enabled on Cisco devices by default.
For example Cisco routers, Cisco switches,
Cisco firewalls, Cisco IP phones, etc.
All of these devices have CDP enabled by default.
CDP messages are periodically sent to multicast
MAC address 0100 0CCC CCCC.
Remember that MAC address, it will be in the
flashcards.
I know the MAC addresses used by different
protocols such as CDP, STP, PVST, HSRP, VRRP,
etc are difficult to memorize.
The Anki flashcards are very helpful for this.
You can add a specific tag to these MAC address
cards, and use the tag to review those specific
cards whenever you want.
This will help you remember all of these MAC
addresses, and which is used for which protocol.
Anyway, if you want to learn Anki functions
like that do a Google search, let’s continue
with CDP.
Because the messages use a multicast MAC address
you might think the message is forwarded to
multiple devices, but it isn’t.
When a device receives a CDP message, it processes
and discards the message.
It does not forward it to other devices.
So, only directly connected neighbors can
become CDP neighbors.
By default, CDP messages are sent once every
60 seconds, out of all interfaces which are
in an up state.
These are the messages that contain the information
like host name, IP address, etc, that I summarized
in the previous When a device receives these
CDP messages from a neighboring device, it
adds an entry for the device in its CDP neighbor
table.
If a neighbor is disconnected, there is a
default CDP holdtime of 180 seconds.
So, if a message isn’t received from a neighbor
for 180 seconds, the neighbor is removed from
the CDP neighbor table.
This makes sure the CDP neighbor table doesn’t
have entries from old neighbors which used
to be connected, but no longer are.
CDP version 2 messages are sent by default.
There are two versions of CDP, version 1 and
version 2, but version 2 is used by default.
CDP version 1 is very old so you’ll probably
never need to use it.
You don’t need to know the differences between
version 1 and version 2, but basically version
2 provides a few more advanced features like
the ability to identify native VLAN mismatches.
Okay let’s get right into the CLI to see
exactly what information is shared by CDP.
To demonstrate CDP, as well as LLDP later,
I’ll use this network.
Two routers and two multilayer switches, although
I’m not using any Layer 3 functions on the
switches.
Before looking at the CDP neighbor table,
here are a few other basic CDP show commands.
SHOW CDP tells us the CDP timer, 60 seconds
by default, the CDP holdtime, 180 seconds
by default, and it also shows which version
of CDP is being used, version 2 by default.
Note that if CDP isn’t enabled on the device,
you’ll get a message like this when you
try to use the SHOW CDP command: CDP is not
enabled.
Okay, next I used the command SHOW CDP TRAFFIC.
This command tells us how many CDP packets,
how many CDP advertisements, the device has
sent and received.
At the time that I used this command, R1 had
sent 105 CDP messages and received 112 CDP
messages, and all of those messages were CDP
version 2 messages.
Finally, you can use the SHOW CDP INTERFACE
command, which gives some basic information
about each interface.
You can also specify a certain interface when
entering the command, but if you just enter
SHOW CDP INTERFACE you’ll get information
about all interfaces.
Here you can see the info for G0/0.
You can see the same CDP message timer and
holdtime as above, but what does ‘encapsulation
ARPA’ mean?
ARPA is actually a type of Ethernet encapsulation.
I haven’t talked about the different types
of Ethernet in this course, I’m pretty sure
that’s beyond the scope of the CCNA, but
I just wanted to point that out because I’m
sure some of you would be wondering about
it.
This type of Ethernet is also known as Ethernet
2, so if you want to learn more try a Google
search for Ethernet 2.
Okay, finally down here you can see a basic
summary of how many interfaces are CDP-enabled,
and how many interfaces are in an up state
and a down state.
So, remember these three commands, SHOW CDP,
SHOW CDP TRAFFIC, and SHOW CDP INTERFACE.
Finally let’s look at the CDP neighbor table.
Here it is, on R1 I used the command SHOW
CDP NEIGHBORS to view it.
Let’s look at what you can learn from this
command.
First, the ‘device ID’ column lists the
host name of each of R1’s CDP neighbors.
So, R1 has received CDP messages from SW1
and R2.
Next is the ‘local interface’ column.
This states the interface on the local device,
on R1.
So, if we didn’t have a proper network diagram
and wanted to know which devices are connected
to which interface on R1, we can use this
command.
SW1 is connected to R1’s G0/0 interface,
and R2 is connected to R1’s G0/1 interface,
as shown in the network diagram below.
Next is the holdtime column.
This will reset to 180 each time R1 receives
a CDP message from the neighbor.
With the default timers, it should count down
to 120, then R1 will receive a CDP message
and reset it to 180, and that cycle will repeat.
If this timer reaches 0, the neighbor will
be removed from the CDP neighbor table.
Next is the ‘capability’ column.
This helps you identify what kind of device
you are connected to.
For example, SW1 has the letters R, S, and
I.
What do these codes mean?
You can check up here.
First off, let me point out that I means IGMP.
This is related to multicast and is beyond
the CCNA, don’t worry about it for now.
Then, R means router and S means switch.
Switch is obvious, SW1 is a switch, but why
router?
It’s because this is a multilayer switch,
so it has routing capabilities.
That’s why it’s listed as both a router
and a switch.
Now, how about R2?
It has R and B in its capability column.
Once again, R stands for router, which is
expected because R2 is a router.
And B means ‘source route bridge’.
This is another thing that isn’t necessary
for the CCNA, so don’t worry about memorizing it.
So, I recommend just remembering R for router
and S for switch.
Next is the ‘platform’ column.
This displays the model of the neighboring
device.
As you know, Cisco has various models of routers,
switches, firewalls, etc, and the model will
be displayed here.
However, for these lessons I use virtual devices
running in GNS3, and as you can see nothing
is displayed here, since they aren’t physical
devices.
So, let’s refer to Packet Tracer which actually
does display information here.
For example, in the Packet Tracer network
I made, R1 was connected to a C2900 series
router, R2, and a catalyst 2960 series switch,
SW1.
Okay, last column is ‘port ID’.
This tells you the port ID on the neighboring
device.
So, R1 is connected to SW1’s G0/0 interface
and R2’s G0/0 interface.
Make sure you know the difference between
the ‘local interface’ field, the interface
on this device, and the ‘port ID’ field,
the interface on the neighboring device.
Okay, those are all of the fields of SHOW
CDP NEIGHBORS, but there is more information
you can learn via CDP.
To view that additional information you can
use this command: SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS DETAIL.
As you can see, more information is displayed
for each neighbor.
For example, here’s SW1’s entry.
Some of the information you can see here that
you couldn’t see with the regular SHOW CDP
NEIGHBORS command is the software version,
the version of IOS, running on the neighbor
device.
Because SW1 is a switch, you can also see
VTP information here.
This is something CDP can do but LLDP can’t.
VTP is a Cisco proprietary protocol, so only
Cisco’s CDP can share information about
it.
You can also see the native VLAN of SW1’s
interface, currently it’s the default of
1.
The duplex setting of SW1’s interface is
displayed, also.
So, with these last two fields CDP helps identify
any mismatches of native VLAN or interface
duplex.
Actually, if a mismatch is found CDP will
display messages on the device to let you
know.
Next here’s R2’s entry.
I just wanted to point out that you can see
R2’s IP address here, 10.0.0.2.
SW1 doesn’t have any IP addresses, so none
were displayed above, but the SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS
DETAIL command lets you view the neighbor’s
IP address.
Now, if the device has a lot of CDP neighbors
the output of this command can get quite long.
However, there is another command which lets
you view this detailed information for just
a single neighbor.
That is this command, SHOW CDP ENTRY, followed
by the neighbor’s host name, I used R2 in
this case.
The output here is exactly the same as in
SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS DETAIL, but it only shows
the specified neighbor.
Here’s a brief summary of each of the commands
I just showed you.
I won’t go over them individually, feel
free to pause the video here if you want to
review them.
Because CDP is enabled by default, if you
want to use CDP in your network you don’t
have to do any configuration, you can just
use these SHOW commands.
But now let’s take a look at some basic
CDP configurations.
As I just said, CDP is globally enabled by
default, Cisco devices have CDP activated
by default.
Each interface also has CDP enabled by default.
If you want to enable or disable CDP globally,
use the CDP RUN command from global config
mode.
Use CDP RUN to enable it, which is default,
or NO CDP RUN to disable it.
To enable CDP on an interface, which is the
default state, use CDP ENABLE, and use NO
in front of the command to disable it.
These commands are done from interface config
mode.
You can configure the CDP timer, how often
CDP messages are sent, with the CDP TIMER
command from global config mode.
You can also configure the holdtime with CDP
HOLDTIME.
And you can enable CDP version 2, which is
the default state, with CDP ADVERTISE-V2,
or use NO in front of the command to disable
it and use version 1.
You’ll probably never use that last command,
but I included it anyway.
So, these are the CDP configuration commands
you should know for the CCNA.
CDP RUN, CDP ENABLE, CDP TIMER, CDP HOLDTIME,
and CDP ADVERTISE-V2.
Finally let’s move on to LLDP, Link Layer
Discovery Protocol.
LLDP is an industry standard protocol, so
many different vendors implement it on their
devices.
CDP was the original, and LLDP was later invented
to have an industry standard version.
It is usually disabled on Cisco devices by
default, so it must be manually enabled.
A device can run CDP and LLDP at the same
time, so you don’t have to choose between
them, although usually you’ll just use one.
Here’s another MAC address to remember.
LLDP messages are periodically sent to multicast
MAC address 0180 C200 000E.
Again, use the flashcards to remember that
one.
This is the same as for CDP.
When a device receives an LLDP message, it
processes and discards the message.
It does not forward it to other devices.
So, only directly connected devices can become
LLDP neighbors.
By default, LLDP messages are sent once every
30 seconds, this is half the time of CDP’s
default 60 seconds.
LLDP’s default holdtime is 120 seconds.
LLDP also has an additional timer called the
‘reinitialization delay’.
I don’t think you need to know this for
the CCNA, but here’s a very brief explanation.
If LLDP is enabled, either globally or on
a specific interface, this timer will delay
the actual initialization of LLDP, and the
timer is 2 seconds by default.
I believe the purpose of this timer is to
help in cases of ‘flapping’, when LLDP
is rapidly enabled or disabled for some reason.
So, the device won’t send LLDP messages
out of its interfaces immediately when LLDP
is enabled, it will wait for the initialization
timer to expire.
As I said, you probably don’t have to know
that for the CCNA, but you’ll see that timer
in the output of the commands I’m going
to show you, so I wanted to give a brief explanation.
Because LLDP is disabled by default, before
checking out the SHOW commands let’s see
the configuration commands you should know
for LLDP.
To review, LLDP is usually globally disabled
by default, and it’s also disabled on each
interface by default.
So, to enable LLDP you need to enable it globally
and then enable it on each interface.
You’ll see that the interface configuration
is a little different than CDP.
To enable it globally use LLDP RUN.
This is the same as CDP, just replace the
word CDP with LLDP.
If you want to disable it again after, use
NO in front of the command.
Now the interface configurations.
To enable LLDP transmissions, tx, on an interface,
use LLDP TRANSMIT on the interface.
This causes the interface to start sending
LLDP messages.
However, it won’t receive LLDP messages,
it will simply discard them.
To enable LLDP in the receive direction, rx,
use the LLDP RECEIVE command on the interface.
So, CDP had only one command, CDP ENABLE which
enables the interface to both send and receive
CDP messages.
In LLDP, you need to use two separate commands.
But still, the configuration is quite simple.
Now let’s see how to configure each LLDP
timer.
The timer used to send messages is configured
with LLDP TIMER, then the timer in seconds.
The LLDP holdtime is configured with LLDP
HOLDTIME, then the holdtime in seconds.
Finally, you can configure the LLDP reinitialization
timer, which I briefly mentioned earlier,
with LLDP REINIT, then the timer in seconds.
So, these commands are all fairly similar
to the CDP commands, the biggest difference
is the interface configuration.
Make sure you enable both TRANSMIT and RECEIVE,
unless for some reason you want the interface
to only be able to send or receive, not send
and receive, LLDP messages.
So, I’ve enabled LLDP on all of these devices
with the command LLDP RUN from global config
mode, and LLDP TRANSMIT and RECEIVE on all
interfaces.
They are now running both CDP and LLDP.
Usually LLDP would be used in a multi-vendor
network, not just Cisco, but this setup is
good enough for our purposes, to demonstrate
how LLDP works on Cisco devices.
So, let’s check out some LLDP show commands,
the LLDP versions of the ones I used for CDP.
First, SHOW LLDP gives the same information
as SHOW CDP does for CDP.
It shows that LLDP is enabled, and displays
each of the LLDP timers, which are currently
at the default settings of 30, 120, and 2
seconds.
Then SHOW LLDP TRAFFIC, similar to SHOW CDP
TRAFFIC, shows statistics about how many LLDP
frames were sent and received.
In this case I used the command quickly after
enabling LLDP, only 4 frames have been sent
and only 3 have been received by R1.
Then I used SHOW LLDP INTERFACE.
This shows whether TRANSMIT and RECEIVE are
enabled or disabled on each interface, as
well as the current Tx and Rx state.
For example, for G0/0 both Tx and Rx are enabled.
The Tx state is IDLE, it’s waiting before
it sends the next LLDP frame to SW1.
And the Rx state is WAIT FOR FRAME.
It’s waiting to receive the next LLDP frame
from SW1.
Okay, so those commands are very similar to
their CDP equivalents, although there are
some differences in the output.
Now let’s check out R1’s LLDP neighbor
table.
Here’s R1’s LLDP neighbor table, the command
is SHOW LLDP NEIGHBORS.
First up, the device ID, the host name, of
each neighbor is displayed.
Then the local interface.
Just like in SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS, this is the
interface of the local device, R1 in this
case.
Then the hold time.
This is a little different than in SHOW CDP
NEIGHBORS.
In SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS, you could watch the
timer count down from 180, and then reset
to 180 when a CDP message is received.
However SHOW LLDP NEIGHBORS simply displays
the holdtime that is configured on this device,
120 seconds.
It won’t count down as R1 waits for an LLDP
message from each neighbor.
Then the capability column.
The output here is a little odd.
SW1 shows nothing, and R2 shows R. R means
router, which you would expect from R2, because
it’s a router.
However, why doesn’t the switch capability
display for SW1?
Actually, there is no ‘SWITCH’ capability
code.
Instead, LLDP uses B for Bridge.
Remember I told you, in the spanning tree
lessons, that sometimes the word ‘bridge’
is used instead of switch?
Well here’s another case of that.
However, B isn’t displaying for SW1.
I think this is just because I’m running
these virtual devices in GNS3, it isn’t
detecting that SW1 is an active switch, but
in the next when we look at SHOW LLDP NEIGHBORS
DETAIL you will see this bridge code for SW1.
Okay, and just like in SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS,
the last column is the port ID, the interface
ID of the neighboring device.
R1 is connected to SW1’s G0/0 interface
and R2’s G0/0 interface.
So, this command is very similar to SHOW CDP
NEIGHBORS, but there are a few differences.
Okay, here’s SHOW LLDP NEIGHBORS DETAIL
on R1.
The output is too long to show on one screen,
so R2’s entry is cut off a little at the
bottom.
Let’s check out SW1’s entry.
It gives us additional information like the
operating system version running on SW1.
We can also see the ‘time remaining’.
This is the holdtime, if you want to actually
see it counting down for each neighbor you
have to use the DETAIL version of the command.
And here is the main thing I want to show
you.
CDP had one field for the device’s capabilities,
but LLDP has two when you use SHOW LLDP NEIGHBORS
DETAIL.
‘System capabilities’ and ‘enabled capabilities’.
If you look at system capabilities, you can
see B and R. B is for bridge, meaning switch.
And R is for Router.
So, this is what you would expect, because
SW1 is a multilayer switch.
It has the functions of both a router and
a switch.
However, in this case the ‘enabled capabilities’
field simply displays ‘not advertised’,
so none of SW1’s capabilities are enabled.
If we use the IP ROUTING command on SW1, SW1’s
router functionality will be enabled and the
‘R’ from ‘system capabilities’ will
be copied to ‘enabled capabilities’.
However, I think the reason ‘B’ isn’t
displayed next to ‘enabled capabilities’
is simply because SW1 is a virtual device
running in GNS3, it’s not recognized as
an active switch.
You don’t have to worry about these details,
but I just wanted to explain why it’s displaying
like this.
Note that this command doesn’t display VTP
information like SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS DETAIL
did.
VTP is a Cisco-proprietary protocol, so only
Cisco’s proprietary CDP can display info
about VTP.
The industry-standard LLDP can’t.
Okay, just like for CDP there is a command
you can use to view the exact same output
as SHOW LLDP NEIGHBORS DETAIL, but for a single
neighbor instead of all neighbors.
That command is SHOW LLDP ENTRY, followed
by the neighbor’s host name.
By the way, before using this command I enabled
IP ROUTING on SW1, and now you can see ‘R’,
for Router, is displayed next to ‘enabled
capabilities’ for SW1.
Here’s the same SHOW command summary as
before, but this time for LLDP.
The commands are the same, just replace the
word CDP with LLDP.
The output for these commands is similar to
the output for CDP, but as you saw already
there are a few differences.
Pause the video if you want to review these
commands, but let’s move on.
Let’s briefly look at a couple Wireshark
captures, one for CDP and one for LLDP.
First, this is a CDP message sent from R1
to SW1.
Notice the CDP destination MAC address, 0100.0CCC.CCCC.
But notice that Wireshark describes this destination
MAC as CDP/VTP/DTP/PagP/UDLD.
That’s because this same multicast MAC address
is actually used for multiple protocols, not
just CDP.
Now, here’s the actual CDP information.
You can see here that CDP version 2 is being
used.
The TTL, time to live, is actually the CDP
holdtime.
Here are some other fields such as the device
ID, this is being sent from R1, the version,
platform, addresses, and port ID.
I could expand each of these fields in Wireshark
to view more details, but then the capture
wouldn’t fit on one screen,.
So I just expanded the capabilities field,
and you can see there is a ‘1’ for ‘Router’
and ‘Source Route Bridge’, those are the
capabilities of R1.
Finally, notice that there is no IP packet
inside of this Ethernet frame.
These Layer 2 discovery protocols don’t
use IP addresses, only MAC addresses.
And here’s an LLDP frame capture, this time
a message that SW1 sent to R1.
First up, here’s the destination MAC address
I showed you earlier, 0180.C200.000E.
And here’s the actual LLDP information.
The time to live, TTL, is the LLDP holdtime
of 120 seconds, and you can see the system
name, the host name, of the device which sent
this message, SW1.
Here’s the LLDP capabilities field.
Just like we saw before, SW1’s capabilities
are Bridge and Router, but its only enabled
capability is router.
Okay, you don’t have to look into these
captures in too much detail, I just wanted
to show you some real examples of CDP and
LLDP messages.
Before moving on to the quiz let’s review
what we studied in today’s video.
First I gave a brief intro to Layer 2 discovery
protocols and their purpose.
Basically, they enable directly connected
neighbors to share various information with
each other such as host name, device type,
IP address, software version, etc.
They can be very useful and convenient, but
remember that they can also be considered
a security risk because of the information
they share with connected devices.
So, many network admins choose to disable
them in their networks.
Then I introduced CDP, Cisco’s Layer 2 discovery
protocol.
After that I introduced LLDP, which was developed
after CDP as an industry standard alternative.
LLDP is supported by many vendors, so if your
network uses a mix of Cisco, Juniper, Palo
Alto, Fortinet, whatever, you’ll have to
use LLDP, not CDP.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA, and the practice exams I used to
prepare for my CCNA exam.
Okay, let’s move on to the quiz.
Here’s question 1.
Which of the following commands show the configured
CDP timers?
Select two.
A, SHOW CDP.
B, SHOW CDP TRAFFIC.
C, SHOW CDP INTERFACE.
Or D, SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
Pause the video to think about your answers,
select two.
The answers are A and C. Both of these commands
show the configured CDP message time and holdtime.
D, SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS does show the current
holdtime counting down as the device waits
for a CDP message from its neighbor, but it
doesn’t show the actual configured holdtime.
It also doesn’t display the CDP message
timer, so it’s not one of the best answers.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following commands represent
the default CDP state?
Select two.
A, NO CDP RUN.
B, CDP HOLDTIME 120.
C, CDP ENABLE, from interface config mode.
Or D, CDP TIMER 60.
Pause the video to think about your answers,
select two.
The answers are C and D. CDP ENABLE enables
CDP on an interface, which is the default
state.
D sets the CDP message timer to 60 seconds,
which is the default.
A, NO CDP RUN, disables CDP on the router,
and that is not the default state, CDP is
enabled by default.
B, CDP HOLDTIME 120 sets the hold time to
120 seconds, which is not the default.
The default CDP holdtime is 180 seconds.
So, A and B are incorrect.
Let’s go to question 3.
You issue the show lldp entry SW1 command
on R1.
R1’s neighbor SW1 is a multilayer switch.
What do you expect to see in the ‘system
capabilities’ field of the output?
Here are the options.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is B, System Capabilities: B,R.
B is for bridge, which is another word for
switch.
R is for router.
Because SW1 is a multilayer switch, it has
the functionalities of both a switch and a
router.
S, as shown in options C and D, means switch
in CDP, but it does not mean switch in LLDP.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following statements about LLDP
are true?
Select two.
Here are the options.
Pause the video now, read each option, and
select the two correct choices.
Okay, the correct answers are B and F. When
configuring LLDP, unlike CDP, you must enable
TRANSMIT, Tx, and RECEIVE, Rx, separately
on each interface.
So, B is correct.
And LLDP can be used to learn the OS version
of a neighboring device, so F is also correct.
The other options are incorrect statements
about LLDP.
LLDP is an industry standard protocol, so
A is incorrect.
Its default message timer is 30 seconds, so
C is incorrect.
It can’t be used to learn the OSPF settings
of a neighbor, so D is incorrect.
And it can’t be used to learn the VTP settings
of a neighbor, although CDP can be used to
do that, so E is incorrect.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which interface on R2 is SW2 connected to?
Is it G0/0, G0/1, G0/2, or G0/3?
Pause the video to examine R2’s CDP neighbor
table and select the correct answer.
The correct answer is G0/1.
It is shown here, in the local interface column
of the output.
This shows the interface on R2 that SW2 is
connected to.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s try a bonus question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson ExSim practice question.
You issue the following command on your router.
SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
Which of the following information will be
displayed?
Select 4 choices.
A, the IP address of the neighboring device.
B, the interface on the neighboring device
that is connected to RouterA.
C, The device ID of the neighboring device.
D, the software version running on the neighboring
device.
E, the interface on RouterA that is connected
to the neighboring device.
Or F, the capabilities and product number
of the neighboring device.
Okay, pause the video now to think about your
answer.
Select 4 choices.
Okay, let's check.
Let's go through one by one and see which
answers are correct.
So A, the IP address of the neighboring device.
I think that is not displayed by SHOW CDP
NEIGHBORS.
To view that you have to use SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS
DETAIL, so A is not correct.
B, the interface on the neighboring device
that is connected to RouterA.
That is correct.
You can see that with SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
C, the device ID of the neighboring device.
You can also see that, that is the host name
of the neighboring device.
D, the software version running on the neighboring
device.
I think you cannot see that in SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
Once again, you have to use SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS
DETAIL to view the software version, the operating
system version of the neighboring device.
Okay, E, the interface on RouterA that is
connected to the neighboring device.
You can see that with SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
And how about F?
The capabilities, which is like router, switch,
etc, and product number, this is the model
of the device, of the neighboring device.
And yes you can.
So I think these are the four choices.
You cannot see the IP address of the neighboring
device or the software version of the neighboring
device.
To view those two you have to use SHOW CDP
NEIGHBORS DETAIL.
Okay, so to check my answer I will click down
here, show answer.
And that is correct.
So, here is Boson's explanation.
I'll scroll through it.
You can pause the video to read their explanation,
and I really recommend you do.
Boson gives great explanations, not just why
each correct answer is correct, but also why
each incorrect answer is incorrect.
So they are a great resource to improve your
understanding.
Okay, and at the bottom there are a few references
to the official cert guide by Wendell Odom.
This is a great book for studying for the
CCNA.
And also some Cisco documentation about CDP
which is free to read online.
Okay, so that's Boson ExSim for the CCNA.
If you want to get ExSim, please follow the
link in the video description.
These are by far the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
Once again, follow that link in the video
description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Sign up for my mailing list via the link in
the description, and I’ll send you all of
the flashcards and packet tracer lab files
for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Magrathea, Samil, Aaron, Junhong,
Njabulo, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Apogee, Marko, Daming, Joshua,
Jhilmar, Ed, Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum,
C Mohd, Mark, Yousif, Boson Software, Devin,
Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, December
13th 2020.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.