Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover DNS, Domain Name
System.
DNS is a protocol that you certainly make
use of on a daily basis.
DNS is all about making it easier for us humans
to access different resources over networks
such as the Internet.
For example it allows us to use the domain
name ‘youtube.com’ to access YouTube instead
of having to enter an IP address.
Names like ‘youtube.com’ or ‘google.com’
are much easier for us to remember than IP
addresses.
DNS is part of exam topic 4.3, which says
you must be able to explain the role of DHCP
and DNS within the network.
You don’t need to know DNS in depth for
the CCNA, you don’t need to know the detailed
operations of DNS, just understand its basic
purpose.
The information I give you in this video should
be more than enough for you to answer any
DNS-related questions on the CCNA exam.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First up, the purpose of DNS.
I already mentioned it, but I’ll explain
a little more.
Then the basic functions of DNS, a quick overview
of how it works.
As I said before, I won’t get into unnecessary
details that you don’t need for the CCNA.
Finally, I’ll show how to configure DNS
in Cisco IOS.
Watch until the end of the video for a bonus
practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA.
ExSim practice exams simulate the style and
difficulty of the real CCNA better than any
other practice exams, and from personal experience
I can say they are a great tool to prepare
for the CCNA exam.
If you want to get ExSim, follow the link
in the video description.
Let’s review the purpose of DNS.
DNS is used to resolve human-readable names,
such as google.com, to IP addresses.
Resolve in this case means convert.
You enter a name, such as google.com, and
it converts it to an IP address.
Machines such as PCs don’t use names, they
use addresses such as the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses
we’ve covered in the course.
However names are much easier for us humans
to use and remember than IP addresses.
IP addresses are human-readable too, of course.
IPv4 addresses especially aren’t too long
when written in dotted decimal, however there’s
no doubt that names are much easier to remember.
What’s the IP address of youtube.com?
Chances are you have no idea.
Thanks to DNS, you can access youtube.com
without having to remember the IP address.
When you type ‘youtube.com’ into a web
browser, your device will ask a DNS server
for the IP address of youtube.com.
The DNS server, or servers, your device uses
can be manually configured or learned via
DHCP.
DHCP is the dynamic host configuration protocol,
that will be the topic of a future video.
Okay, that’s the basic outline of DNS.
Now I’ll use this network to demonstrate
how it works.
Three PCs are connected to R1 via SW1.
R1 is connected to the Internet, and somewhere
across the Internet is Google’s DNS server
with the IP address 8.8.8.8.
So, let’s go on to PC1, a Windows PC, and
check out how DNS works.
Here’s the CLI of PC1, the Windows command
prompt.
I used the command IPCONFIG /ALL to display
various info for PC1.
You should remember this command, ‘verify
IP parameters for client operating systems’
is actually a CCNA exam topic.
I’ll probably make a separate video to cover
that exam topic, but we’ll cover a few Windows
commands in this video.
So, here’s some of the information displayed.
Note that there is also the command IPCONFIG
without the /ALL, but it doesn’t display
what I want to show you, which is the DNS
server of 8.8.8.8 which I configured here
on PC1.
As I said in the previous slide, end hosts
will usually automatically learn which DNS
server to use via the protocol DHCP.
However we haven’t covered that yet in the
course, so I manually configured PC1 to use
Google’s DNS server 8.8.8.8.
Let’s see how DNS works.
I used the command NSLOOKUP youtube.com.
I briefly showed you the NSLOOKUP command
in the NTP video, it stands for ‘Name Server
Lookup’.
It tells the device to ask its DNS server
for the IP address of the specified name.
As we saw before, PC1 is using Google’s
DNS server at 8.8.8.8.
Here’s the answer from Google’s DNS server.
Youtube.com’s IPv4 address is 172.217.25.110,
and its IPv6 address is displayed also.
So I tried a ping, specifying the name instead
of IP address.
The name ‘youtube.com’ is then converted
to an IP address, and PC1 is able to ping
the IP address.
Note that you don’t have to use the NSLOOKUP
command before sending the ping.
If your device doesn’t know the correct
IP address it will automatically ask the server.
I just used NSLOOKUP to demonstrate the command.
Let me show you visually.
To learn the IP address of youtube.com, PC1
sends a DNS query message to its configured
DNS server, 8.8.8.8.
Then the DNS server replies, telling PC1 that
the IP address is 172.217.25.110.
What’s the role of R1 in this exchange?
In this case, R1 isn’t acting as a DNS server
or client.
It is simply forwarding packets.
So, no DNS configuration is required on R1.
That’s an important point.
Often there’s simply no need to do any DNS
configuration on routers.
They just need to perform their job of routing
network traffic.
However, a Cisco router can act as a DNS server
and client, so I’ll show you how to configure
that later in this video.
I used Wireshark to capture the traffic from
that NSLOOKUP command.
There are four messages.
Here’s the first one.
It’s from source 192.168.0.101, PC1, to
destination 8.8.8.8, Google’s DNS server.
Under ‘info’ it says standard query, so
this is a standard DNS query message, a request
to the server.
Notice this part here, ‘A youtube.com’.
I’ll tell you in a minute what that ‘A’
means.
Here’s the next message, from Google’s
DNS server 8.8.8.8 to PC1, 192.168.0.101.
Under ‘info’ it says standard query response.
So this is a response to PC1’s query.
And here it says A youtube.com A 172.217.25.110.
Notice that it’s an IPv4 address.
Now here’s the next message, again a standard
query from 192.168.0.101 to 8.8.8.8.
This time it says AAAA, which we call quadruple
A, youtube.com.
And here’s the standard query response.
Quadruple A youtube.com, quadruple A, followed
by an IPv6 address.
So, can you guess what ‘A’ and ‘quadruple
A’ stand for?
DNS ‘A’ records are used to map names
to IPv4 addresses.
In the first query message, PC1 asked the
DNS server for the A record of youtube.com,
so the DNS server responded with an IPv4 address.
DNS ‘quadruple A’ records are used to
map names to IPv6 addresses.
In the second query message, PC1 asked the
DNS server for the quadruple A record of youtube.com,
so the server responded with an IPv6 address.
Now let’s briefly look inside of that first
query.
Here’s Layer 4, which protocol is used?
It’s UDP.
Remember, DNS uses both TCP and UDP, so why
is UDP used here?
Standard DNS queries and responses typically
use UDP.
TCP is used for DNS messages greater than
512 bytes.
In either case, UDP or TCP, the port number
is 53.
You don’t have to know the details of when
TCP would be used, just remember that standard
DNS queries and responses like these will
usually use UDP, and remember that number,
512 bytes.
If you’d like to know the details, try a
google search for ‘DNS TCP UDP’, you’ll
find lots of great resources.
Finally, down here is the UDP query itself,
asking for the A record of youtube.com.
As I’ve said before, Wireshark is a very
useful tool not just for studying, but it
also has many real-world on-the-job uses.
If you have some time I recommend downloading
it and checking out some of the network traffic
your computer is sending and receiving.
Moving on, let me introduce the DNS cache.
Devices will save the DNS server’s responses
to a local DNS cache.
This means they don’t have to query the
server every single time they want to access
a particular destination.
This saves a lot of unnecessary network traffic.
So, to view the DNS cache on a Windows PC
use the command IPCONFIG /DISPLAYDNS.
Here’s the record for youtube.com.
However look at the record type.
It’s not A or quadruple A, it’s CNAME,
and it lists another domain name.
CNAME, canonical name, is another kind of
DNS record that basically maps a name to another
name.
I looked in the DNS cache for that other domain
name, and here’s the A record with that
same IPv4 address, 172.217.25.110.
So, as you can see there are some complexities
to DNS.
DNS is a very important part of the Internet
and is interesting to study, but once again
for the CCNA you just need to know the basics.
Here’s one more command in the Windows command
prompt, you can clear the DNS cache with the
command IPCONFIG /FLUSHDNS.
It says the DNS resolver cache was flushed,
and now when I use IPCONFIG /DISPLAYDNS, nothing
is displayed.
If I try to access youtube.com again, for
example, PC1 will have to send another DNS
query to the DNS server to learn the IP address
again.
Before moving on to R1, here’s one more
point about these PCs.
In addition to a DNS cache, most devices have
a ‘hosts’ file which is simply a list
of hosts and IP addresses.
In Windows it’s in the C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc
folder, and the name is simply ‘hosts’.
Let’s see what’s in that file.
In Windows it looks like this.
By default there are no hosts listed, however
here on PC1 I added an entry for R1 simply
by typing the IP address, a space, and then
the host name.
I then returned to the command prompt and
entered PING R1, and PC1 was able to ping
R1 because it had an entry in its hosts file.
This isn’t DNS, it’s a simple alternative
to DNS.
A long time ago before DNS was invented, host
files like this were used.
In modern days a hosts file might be used
in a small network to list some hosts on the
local network if necessary, however DNS is
a much better solution.
Okay, so I hope that gave you a general understanding
of how DNS works.
A client wants to access something using a
name, such as accessing a website like youtube.com.
But in order to access the website, it needs
to know the IP address of the destination.
To learn the IP address, the client sends
a query to a DNS server, which informs it
of the IP address.
Now let’s look at how to configure DNS in
Cisco IOS, using R1 as an example.
Let me repeat, for hosts in a network to use
DNS, you don’t need to configure DNS on
the routers.
They will simply forward the DNS messages
like any other packets.
However, the Cisco router itself can be configured
as a DNS server, although it’s rare.
If an internal DNS server is used, usually
it’s a Windows or Linux server.
By ‘internal’ I mean a DNS server in the
local network, not a public server like Google’s.
Also, a Cisco router can be configured as
a DNS client, so you can execute PING and
other commands using names instead of IP addresses.
Here’s how to configure a router as a DNS
server.
First, you should use the command IP DNS SERVER
from global config mode.
This configures the router to act as a DNS
server.
If a client sends a DNS query to R1, R1 will
respond if it has the requested record.
However, for that to work R1 needs to have
some records.
Use the IP HOST command, followed by the host
name and the IP address, to build a host table
on R1.
I configured entries for R1 itself, PC1, PC2,
and PC3.
Next, it’s a good idea to configure an external
DNS server for R1 to use.
R1 will query this server if it doesn’t
have a requested record in its own table.
I configured R1 to use Google’s DNS server
at 8.8.8.8.
I’ll demonstrate how this works in a minute.
The final command is IP DOMAIN LOOKUP.
This enables R1 to perform DNS queries.
If this command isn’t enabled, R1 won’t
be able to query Google’s DNS server.
However, this command is enabled by default,
so usually you won’t have to configure it.
By the way, a lot of resources teach an old
version of the command, which is IP DOMAIN
‘hyphen’ LOOKUP.
This is the old version of the command, however
modern IOS versions still support it.
You should probably know both versions, with
and without the hyphen.
So, that’s how you configure a router to
be a DNS server.
Now let me demonstrate how it works.
So let’s say PC1 wants to ping PC2.
By the way, I configured PC1 to use R1 as
its DNS server, instead of Google.
So I issue the PING PC2 command on PC1, however
note that I used ‘hyphen n 1’ to send
only a single ping, for the purpose of this
demonstration.
PC1 doesn’t have an entry for PC2 in its
own host table, so it has to use DNS to learn
the IP address of PC2.
It sends a query to its DNS server R1, asking
‘What’s the IP address of PC2?’.
R1 has an entry for PC2, I just configured
it in the last slide using the IP HOST command,
so it replies to PC1’s query.
Finally PC1 sends the ping to PC2, PC2 sends
a reply, and the process is over.
Now PC1 has entry for PC2 in its DNS cache,
so if I issue the PING PC2 command again it
won’t have to perform a DNS query, it already
knows PC2’s IP address.
Okay I’ve added the YouTube server to the
diagram.
This time, I issued the command PING YOUTUBE.COM
-N 1.
So let me walk through that process again.
Before PC1 can actually send the ping, it
has to know the IP address of youtube.com,
so it sends a query to its DNS server, R1.
However, R1 doesn’t have an entry for youtube.com.
What does it do?
Remember I used the IP NAME-SERVER 8.8.8.8
command on R1, so R1 can send queries to Google’s
DNS server.
That’s what it does, it sends a DNS query
to 8.8.8.8.
Google’s server replies, telling R1 the
IP address of youtube.com.
Now R1 is able to reply to PC1’s query,
telling it the IP address of youtube.com.
Finally PC1 is able to send the ping to YouTube,
and YouTube sends the reply.
Sorry for the messy diagram, but I hope that
helps you understand how this works.
R1 acts as a DNS server for PC1, but if it
doesn’t have an entry for a record that
PC1 requests, it acts as a DNS client and
asks Google’s DNS server for the record.
To view both the configured hosts, as well
as the hosts learned and cached via DNS, use
the command SHOW HOSTS.
For example, here you can see the cached entry
for youtube.com that R1 learned from Google’s
DNS server.
Notice in the ‘flags’ column it says ‘temp’,
for temporary.
Because this entry was learned via DNS it
is not permanent.
If it expires it will have to be re-learned.
These manually configured entries, however,
are permanent as displayed in the flags column.
Next, here’s how to configure a Cisco router
as a DNS client.
Basically, two of the commands I already showed
you are used to configure a router to act
as a DNS client.
So, to demonstrate this I deleted all DNS
settings from R1.
Then I tried to ping youtube.com, but it didn’t
work.
R1 wasn’t able to translate ‘youtube.com’
to an IP address.
Then I used the command IP NAME-SERVER 8.8.8.8,
configuring R1 to use Google’s DNS server.
I also used the command IP DOMAIN LOOKUP.
Once again, this command is enabled by default
so you don’t actually have to enter it,
but make sure you know it.
Then I tried the ping again and it worked.
So, we have configured R1 as a DNS client.
However, this time it is not a DNS server.
If PC1 tries to use R1 as a DNS server, R1
will not reply to PC1’s queries.
Now there is one more optional command that
you can use.
That is the IP DOMAIN NAME command, I specified
jeremysitlab.com as R1’s domain.
You’ve probably heard the term ‘domain’
or ‘domain name’ before, actually I think
I’ve mentioned it a few times in this video.
Names like ‘google.com’ and ‘jeremysitlab.com’
are domain names, and they define a realm
or area of administrative control in the Internet.
For example, the domain name ‘google.com’
tells us that Gmail at ‘mail.google.com’,
this server ’dns.google.com’, Google’s
NTP servers at ‘time.google.com’ all fall
under Google’s administration and control.
When this command is applied, this will be
a default domain name applied to all hostnames
without a specified domain name.
For example, the command PING PC1 will actually
become PING PC1.JEREMYSITLAB.COM.
Like the IP DOMAIN LOOKUP command, there is
an older version with a hyphen between DOMAIN
and NAME.
That old version is still supported in modern
IOS, so you can use either.
I will cover this command in a later video
about SSH.
SSH is a protocol that can be used to connect
to the CLI of a device to configure it, but
a domain name is needed to enable SSH.
I’ll cover this command more in that video.
For review, here are the commands I showed
you in this video, both the commands you can
use in the Windows command prompt and the
Cisco IOS commands.
If you don’t remember any of these commands,
go back in the video to review.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s review
what we covered in this video.
First I introduced the purpose of DNS.
Basically it enables the use of easy-to-remember
names like google.com and youtube.com instead
of IP addresses.
DNS clients send queries to DNS servers, asking
for the IP address of a particular name like
youtube.com, and the server replies, telling
it the IP address.
Then I demonstrated some of the basic functions
of DNS by using a Windows PC.
I showed how it used Google’s DNS server
to learn the IP address of youtube.com, and
then it added that IP address to its own DNS
cache.
Finally I showed you how to configure a Cisco
router to be a DNS server and a DNS client.
As I have already said multiple times, in
most cases you don’t need to configure DNS
on a router.
Usually you have a separate DNS server fill
that role.
However you still should know how to configure
it.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which of the following Windows command prompt
commands will display the PC’s DNS server?
(select two).
Here are the commands.
Pause the video now to find the correct answers,
select two.
The correct answers are B, IPCONFIG /ALL and
D, NSLOOKUP.
Both of these commands will show the DNS server
that is configured on the PC.
A, IPCONFIG displays things like the PC’s
IP address, subnet mask, and default gateway,
but not details like the DNS server.
C, IPCONFIG /DISPLAYDNS shows the PC’s DNS
cache, but not the DNS server address.
Although the CCNA is focused on the Cisco
CLI, of course, verifying parameters on client
operating systems is now a CCNA exam topic
so I think it’s a good idea to know some
Windows commands.
Okay let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following statements about DNS
are true? (select two).
Here are the options.
Pause the video now to find the correct answers,
select two.
The correct answers are B and D. DNS ‘A’
records map hostnames to IPv4 addresses, so
B is correct.
And a Cisco router can be both a DNS server
and a DNS client at the same time, so D is
correct.
A is incorrect because messages greater than
512 bytes in size are sent using TCP, not
UDP.
UDP is used for messages 512 bytes or less
in size.
As for C, quadruple A records, not triple
A records, map hostnames to IPv6 addresses.
Okay let’s go to question 3.
PC1 is configured to use an external server,
8.8.8.8, as its DNS server.
What DNS command is necessary on R1 to enable
this?
Here are the options.
Pause the video to think about the answer.
The answer is D. No DNS configurations are
needed on R1.
To forward DNS queries and replies between
clients and servers, a router doesn’t need
any DNS configurations.
It will simply forward the packets as normal.
Okay let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following Cisco IOS commands
shows the cached name/IP address mappings
learned via DNS?
Here are the commands.
Pause the video to think about the answer.
The answer is A, SHOW HOSTS.
It displays both the hosts learned via DNS
as well as the manually configured host entries.
B and D are not real commands, and C is the
command for Windows, not for Cisco IOS.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following protocols can hosts
use to automatically learn the address of
their DNS server?
Here are the options.
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is C, DHCP.
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol allows
hosts to learn various parameters such as
their IP address and subnet mask, default
gateway, and DNS server.
DHCP will be covered in another video.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson ExSim practice question.
A web browser on HostA sends an HTTP request
to WWW_server.
This is the first time HostA has ever sent
a request to WWW_server.
HostA does not use a hosts files.
With which of the following devices does HostA
establish a TCP connection in this scenario?
Select the best answer.
Here are the options.
A, only DNS_server and WWW_server.
B, DNS_server, Default_GW, and WWW_server.
C, only Default_GW and WWW_server.
Or D, only WWW_server.
Okay pause the video now to find the correct
answer.
Okay let's check.
First, does HostA established a TCP connection
with Default_GW?
No, it does not.
This router simply forwards traffic between
the devices, but HostA is not trying to access
something on this router so there's no need
to establish a TCP connection.
How about with DNS_server?
So it says this is the first time HostA has
ever sent a request to WWW_server.
So that means it has no entry in its DNS cache
for this web server.
And HostA also does not use a hosts file,
so HostA has to contact the DNS server to
learn the IP address of the web server.
So, to learn the IP address from the DNS server,
does it use TCP?
Does it establish a TCP connection?
The answer is no.
As I said in this video, standard DNS queries
and responses use UDP, not TCP.
So there's no need to establish a TCP connection
with this DNS server.
Finally, how about the web server?
Does it establish a TCP connection?
Yes, a web browser on HostA sends an HTTP
request to the web server.
HTTP uses TCP port 80, so HostA must establish
a TCP connection with the web server.
So that means the answer is D, only WWW_server.
Click on show answer and there it is, correct.
So here is Boson's explanation.
You can pause the video to read it, and I
recommend you do.
They also have a reference to some documentation
from Microsoft, explaining DNS and how it
works on both TCP and UDP.
Okay so that's Boson ExSim for the CCNA.
These are by far the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
If you want to get Boson ExSim, please follow
the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Sign up for my mailing list via the link in
the description, and I’ll send you all of
the flashcards and packet tracer lab files
for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Donald, C Mohd, Gustavo, Anthony,
Biraj, Junhong, Njabulo, Benjamin, Tshepiso,
Justin, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Apogee,
Marko, Daming, Jhilmar, Ed, Value, John, Funnydart,
Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif, Boson Software,
Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, January
11th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.