Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like
these videos, please subscribe to follow along
with the series. Also, please like and leave
a comment, and share the video to help spread
this free series of videos. Thanks for your
help.
In this video we will cover Syslog. Syslog
is a protocol used to keep logs of various
events that happen on the device, for example
interfaces going up or down, OSPF neighbor
relationships going up or down, etc. The log
messages can be shown in real-time in the
CLI of the device to inform you of important
events as they occur, and they can also be
stored in the device or on an external server
and examined later. These logs are very important,
so understanding Syslog is essential for network
admins and engineers. Syslog is mentioned
in exam topic 4.5, which says you must be
able to describe the use of syslog features
including facilities and levels. In this video
I plan to cover everything you need to know
about Syslog for the CCNA.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll give a brief overview of Syslog
and outline how it works. Then I’ll introduce
the Syslog message format. Syslog messages
have a standard format, and it’s important
that you know the format so you can read and
understand Syslog messages. Then I’ll introduce
the various Syslog facilities and severity
levels. You probably aren’t sure exactly
what ‘facility’ and ‘severity’ mean
yet, but they were both mentioned in the exam
topics list so we’ll cover them in this
video. Then I’ll introduce some basic Syslog
configurations. Just like SNMP, Syslog configuration
isn’t mentioned in the exam topics, but
I think it’s important to get some hands-on
practice. So, I’ll go over the basic Syslog
configuration commands. Make sure to watch
until the end of the video for a bonus practice
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for
CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
Here’s a quick overview of Syslog. Syslog
is an industry standard protocol for message
logging. On network devices, Syslog can be
used to log events such as changes in interface
status, changes in OSPF neighbor status, or
neighbor status in other routing protocols
like EIGRP and BGP, also system restarts,
etc. Tons of different events can be logged,
so I’m not going to try to list them all.
The messages can be displayed in the CLI as
you configure the device, saved in the device’s
RAM, or sent to an external Syslog server.
I’m sure you’ve seen these messages as
you configure devices in Packet Tracer. For
example, I used NO SHUTDOWN to enable a router
interface. Notice that two Syslog messages
are displayed, indicating that the interface
state has changed to UP. Logs are essential
when troubleshooting issues, examining the
cause of incidents, etc. Syslog and SNMP are
both used for monitoring and troubleshooting
devices. They are complementary to each other,
but their functionalities are quite different.
After covering Syslog in this video, I’ll
give a brief summary of how Syslog and SNMP
are different at the end.
Now let’s take a look at the Syslog message
format. There are the fields you can expect
to see in a standard Syslog message. Let’s
go through them. First, there is a sequence
number indicating the order, the sequence,
of the log messages. Next there is a timestamp
indicating at what time the message was generated.
These timestamps are particularly important,
especially when comparing the logs of different
devices. Assuming both devices have accurate
time thanks to NTP, you can use these timestamps
to compare when different events occurred
on different devices. Note that these two
fields may or may not be displayed, depending
on the device’s configuration. Sequence
numbers are often not used, however the timestamps
are very important and I highly recommend
including them in Syslog messages. Next there
is the facility, this is a value that indicates
which process on the device generated this
message. For example, if OSPF generated the
message when an OSPF neighbor came up, OSPF
would be displayed in this field. Next is
the severity, which indicates the severity
of the event. Some messages are just informational,
simply letting you know that something happened.
Other messages indicate something much more
serious that might need to be dealt with immediately.
There are 8 severity levels, and you’ll
need to know them all for the exam. Then there
is a mnemonic, which is a short code for the
message that indicates what happened. For
example, if the facility is OSPF, this mnemonic
might be a code indicating that the message
is about OSPF neighbor adjacencies. If the
facility is LINK, it might be a code indicating
that the message is about an interface going
up or down. Finally, there is the description.
This is the detailed information about the
event being reported, about what actually
happened.
Before looking at some examples of Syslog
messages, let’s cover the different Syslog
severity levels. As I briefly mentioned, these
levels indicate how serious, how severe, the
event is. For example, something like a serious
hardware failure is more severe than an OSPF
neighbor moving to the FULL state. There are
8 severity levels, as displayed here. Each
severity level has a number, 0 being the most
severe and 7 being the least severe. Each
level also has a keyword, which is a name
identifying the level. Then there is a brief
description. I took these descriptions directly
from the official RFC for Syslog. First there
is level 0, emergency, events which render
the system unusable. Level 1, alert, is for
events for which action must be taken immediately.
So, these are also very serious events. Level
2 is called critical, and the description
is simply ‘critical conditions’. Same
for level 3, error, and level 4, warning.
Next is level 5, notice, used for messages
representing a ‘normal but significant condition’.
In the official RFC for Syslog, the keyword
for level 5 is ‘Notice’, but in the CLI
of Cisco IOS the name is Notification, so
make sure you know of both names. Notice and
Notification for level 5. Level 6 is ‘Informational’,
and then finally the least severe level, level
7, is Debugging. These are the least severe
messages. Now, the RFC doesn’t give detailed
definitions about exactly what events fit
into each severity level. So, each vendor
will interpret these levels differently. Here’s
a quote from the RFC. Because severities are
very subjective, a relay or collector (basically
that means a Syslog server) should not assume
that all originators have the same definition
of severity. That’s from RFC 5424, The Syslog
Protocol, which is free to read online if
you Google it. Basically it means that you
shouldn’t expect a Cisco router’s ‘Warning’
level to be exactly the same as a Juniper
router’s ‘Warning’ level, for example.
Each vendor may interpret each level differently.
For the CCNA exam, make sure you have memorized
the levels and keywords. You should know that
level 1 is Alert, and Informational is level
6, for example. If you want some help remembering
them, here’s a mnemonic. Every Awesome Cisco
Engineer Will Need Ice cream Daily. Just like
the OSI model, if you know any other good
ways to remember these levels post them in
the comment section!
Let’s look at some examples of Syslog messages.
Here’s one, first there’s the timestamp,
indicating the month, date, hours, minutes,
seconds, and milliseconds. Notice that there
is no sequence number before the timestamp.
As I mentioned earlier, the sequence number
and timestamp fields may or may not be displayed,
depending on the device’s configuration.
Here’s the facility, LINK. And the severity
is 3. The mnemonic is UPDOWN, which tells
us the message is about an interface going
up or down. Finally, here’s the description,
which tells us exactly what happened. Interface
gigabitethernet0/0 changed state to up. So,
that’s an example Syslog message. Make sure
you’re able to identify each part of this
message. For example, you might be asked,
what’s the facility of this Syslog message?
You should be able to answer ‘LINK’. Or
if asked about the severity, you should be
able to answer ‘3’ or ‘error’, depending
on the options. I can’t say for sure, but
judging by the exam topics list those seem
like the kind of question you can expect on
the exam. Okay, let’s see some more examples.
Here’s a message about an OSPF neighbor
moving to the FULL state. The facility is
OSPF, and IOS declares this a level 5, notification
level, message. The mnemonic is A D J C H
G, adjacency change. Here’s another example,
and for this one I turned on the sequence
numbers so you can see what it looks like.
In this case the facility is SYS for system,
the severity is 5 again, and remember those
keywords for level 5, ‘notice’ or ‘notification’.
And the mnemonic is CONFIG_I, with a description
of ‘configured from console by jeremy on
console.’ You get messages like this when
you exit global config mode and return to
privileged exec mode. And one more example,
this time I just changed the timezone from
UTC to JST and this messages was displayed.
Again, the facility is SYS, but this time
the severity is 6. What’s the keyword for
level 6? It’s ‘informational’. And the
mnemonic is CLOCKUPDATE. So, once again make
sure you can identify each part of a Syslog
message, it’s stated directly in the exam
topics list.
Soon we’ll take a look at how to configure
Syslog in the CLI, but before that here’s
an overview of the different locations Syslog
messages can be sent to. First is the console
line. This means that Syslog messages will
be displayed when connected to the device
via the console port. By default, all messages,
from level 0 through level 7, are displayed
when connected to the CLI via the device’s
console port. In Packet Tracer, for example,
when you click on a device and go to the CLI
tab, it operates as if you’re connected
via the console port of the device. So, that’s
why Syslog messages are displayed when configuring
devices in packet tracer via the CLI tab.
Okay, the next location is the VTY lines.
This means that Syslog messages will be displayed
in the CLI when connected to the device via
Telnet or SSH. Telnet and SSH will be covered
in a later video. They are protocols used
to connect to a device over a network, without
being directly connected to the device’s
console port. Logging to the VTY lines is
disabled by default, so Syslog messages will
not be displayed if you’re connecting to
the device via Telnet or SSH. So, if you shutdown
an interface, for example, no message will
be displayed. The next location for Syslog
messages is the ‘buffer’ of the device.
This means that Syslog messages will be saved
to RAM. By default, all messages, from level
0 to level 7, will be displayed in the buffer.
You can view the messages in the buffer with
the SHOW LOGGING command. We’ll take a look
at that command in the lab video. You can
also configure the device to send Syslog messages
to an external server. This is very useful,
especially in large networks, but also in
small networks. Having a central server for
the Syslog messages makes network management
easier and makes it easier to compare the
logs of multiple devices. By the way, Syslog
servers will listen for Syslog messages on
UDP port 514. So, if a device sends a Syslog
message to a Syslog server, the destination
port will be UDP 514. Remember that!
So here are some basic Syslog configurations.
First, at the top, configuring logging to
the console line. This is enabled by default,
but here’s how you configure it. The command
is LOGGING CONSOLE, followed by the level.
I specified 6. Note that, in all of these
commands, you can specify either the number
or the keyword of the level. So in this case
I specified 6, but I could have used the keyword
INFORMATIONAL instead. Also note that this
doesn’t only enable informational messages.
This enables logging for informational severity
and higher, so informational to emergency,
which includes levels 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, and
0. By default the console logs all messages,
including level 7, debugging, so setting the
level to 6 actually slightly restricts the
messages that will be displayed via the console.
Okay, next the command to configure logging
to the VTY lines is LOGGING MONITOR, followed
by the level. Just like above, you can specify
the level number or keyword, this time I used
the keyword of INFORMATIONAL instead of the
level, 6. Next, to configure logging to the
buffer the command is LOGGING BUFFERED, followed
by the size of the buffer in bytes and the
level. The size is optional, if you don’t
specify it the device will use its default
size. Just be careful not to set the buffer
size too large, because that can take system
memory away from other essential operations.
Also to repeat, to specify the logging level
you can use either the number or the keyword,
and it enables logging for not only level
6 but also levels 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, and 0. Finally,
logging to an external server can be configured
with LOGGING, followed by the server IP, or
LOGGING HOST, followed by the server IP. The
commands are the same, you can use whichever.
Now, to configure the levels of messages sent
to the external server, you need to use a
different command. It’s LOGGING TRAP, followed
by the level. This time I specified DEBUGGING,
but once again I could have used the level
number of 7 instead. This enables logging
of all levels, not just 7 but also 6, 5, 4,
3, 2, 1, and 0. So, that’s how you enable
Syslog logging to different locations and
specify which levels of messages should be
displayed. Because Syslog configuration isn’t
specified in the exam topics, you probably
don’t have to memorize these commands for
the exam. However, I will include flashcards
for them and also you can get some practice
with them in the following lab video.
Let me introduce another command. Even if
LOGGING MONITOR is enabled, by default Syslog
messages will not be displayed when connected
via Telnet or SSH. You need another command,
too. For the messages to be displayed, you
must use the following command: TERMINAL MONITOR,
from privileged exec mode. But not only that,
this command must be used every time you connect
to the device via Telnet or SSH. So, if you
connect via SSH and use the TERMINAL MONITOR
command, Syslog messages will be displayed
as you configure the device. However, after
you log out, that ‘session’ is finished
and the TERMINAL MONITOR command is no longer
effective. To display Syslog messages in the
CLI when you connect again next time, you’ll
need to use the TERMINAL MONITOR command again.
I’ll demonstrate this in the lab video.
This next command isn’t essential, but very
convenient. By default, logging messages displayed
in the CLI while you are in the middle of
typing a command will result in something
like this. Notice in the middle of typing
SHOW IP IN, the log message was displayed.
I continued typing the command, and the command
continued right after the log message. I changed
the color of the command to make it easier
to see, but when this actually happens in
the CLI it can be hard to see where the Syslog
message ends and where the command continues.
To prevent this, you should use the logging
synchronous command on the appropriate line,
and I will talk more about ‘line’ configuration
in the Telnet and SSH video. You don’t need
to learn this yet, but for example here’s
how you can enter the console line, LINE CONSOLE
0, and then configure LOGGING SYNCHRONOUS.
This will cause a new line to be printed if
your typing is interrupted by a message. Here’s
an example. I typed SHOW IP INT, a log message
was displayed, and then SHOW IP INT was reprinted
on a new line. This makes it easier to continue
typing the command. So, this is a nice command
to know and a command I usually use when doing
labs. It just makes things easier to see.
Okay, the last two commands I want to show
you are SERVICE TIMESTAMPS and SERVICE SEQUENCE-NUMBERS.
This is how you control whether or not the
timestamps and sequence numbers will be displayed
in Syslog messages. To enable timestamps for
Syslog messages, use SERVICE TIMESTAMPS LOG,
followed either by DATETIME or UPTIME. If
you specify DATETIME, timestamps will display
the actual date and time when the event occurred.
If you specify UPTIME, timestamps won’t
display the date and time, they will display
how long the device had been running when
the event occurred. DATETIME is usually the
preferred option, so that’s what I chose.
Then I enabled sequence numbers with the SERVICE
SEQUENCE-NUMBERS command. After I exit global
config mode, you can see that the Syslog message
has both a sequence number and a timestamp.
I think it’s a good idea to always enable
timestamps, although personally I don’t
find sequence numbers particularly useful,
so I prefer to keep them disabled.
Here’s a summary of the commands I just
showed you. I think trying these out in a
lab will be very helpful, not just for remembering
the commands but for understanding how Syslog
works. So make sure to watch the next video
and try out the lab yourself in Packet Tracer.
Finally, here’s a brief comparison of Syslog
and SNMP. As I said before, Syslog and SNMP
are both used for monitoring and troubleshooting
of devices. They are complementary, but their
functionalities are different. Syslog is used
for message logging. Events that occur within
the system are categorized based on facility
and severity and logged, both within the device
and likely to an external Syslog server. Syslog
is used for system management, analysis, and
troubleshooting. Here’s a big difference.
Messages are sent from the devices to the
server, but the server can’t actively pull
information from the devices, like an SNMP
Get message, or modify variables on the devices,
like an SNMP Set message. Now SNMP. It is
used to retrieve and organize information
about the SNMP managed devices. Things like
IP addresses, current interface status, device
temperature, CPU usage, etc are stored as
variables and organized within the MIB. SNMP
servers can use Get to query the clients and
Set to modify variables on the clients. Syslog
and SNMP are used together to facilitate network
device management, and you need to be familiar
with both of them for the test.
Before the quiz, here’s a review of what
we covered today. First I gave a brief overview
of Syslog. It’s an industry standard protocol
for logging events that occur on devices.
I introduced the Syslog message format, as
well as facilities and severity levels. Make
sure you know all of those severity level
numbers and names, and make sure you can identify
the different parts of a Syslog message. Finally,
I showed you some basic Syslog configurations.
You probably won’t be asked about Syslog
configuration on the exam, but I think the
hands-on practice in Packet Tracer will be
very helpful. Make sure to watch until the
end of the quiz for a bonus practice question
from Boson Software’s ExSim, the best practice
exams for the CCNA, and the ones I used to
prepare for my exams. Okay, let’s go to
question 1 of the quiz.
What is the severity level of the following
Syslog message? Here are the options. Pause
the video now to examine the message and select
the correct answer.
The answer is C, Notification. This is indicated
by the 5 here, between the facility and the
mnemonic. This severity level is called ‘Notice’
in the RFC for Syslog, but it’s also known
as ‘Notification’. In the CLI of Cisco
IOS, ‘Notification’ is used. Okay, let’s
go to question 2.
Here’s another one. What is the severity
level of the following Syslog message? Here
are the options. Pause the video now to examine
the message and select the correct answer.
The answer is B, Error. That is the name of
severity level 3. Make sure you know all of
the severity levels and their names. They’re
mentioned in the exam topics list, so they’re
definitely important. Okay, let’s go to
question 3.
Which of the following locations are Syslog
messages sent to by default, without any specific
Syslog configuration? (select two). Here are
the options. Pause the video now to think
about the answers, select two.
The answers are B, the console line and C,
the buffer. So, by default you will see Syslog
messages in realtime when connected to the
CLI of the device via the console port. You
can also use SHOW LOGGING to view those messages
stored in the logging buffer, in the memory
of the device. The device will not send Syslog
messages to an external server until you configure
it to do so, and Syslog messages also won’t
be displayed in the CLI while connecting to
the device via the VTY lines using Telnet
or SSH. I’ll cover Telnet and SSH in detail
in another video, don’t worry about them
for now. Okay, let’s go to question 4.
You issue the logging buffered 6 command on
R1. Syslog messages of which severity levels
will be saved to the logging buffer? Here
are the options. Pause the video to think
about the answer.
The answer is C, severity 0 to 6. When you
specify a level of log messages, all messages
of that level and higher severity, meaning
numerically lower because the lower numbers
are more severe, will be displayed or saved
to the buffer. Okay, let’s go to question
5.
Which of the following Syslog message fields
might not be displayed, depending on the device’s
configuration? (select two). Here are the
options. Pause the video to think about the
answers, select two.
The answers are A, sequence and D, time stamp.
You can configure these with the SERVICE TIMESTAMPS
and SERVICE SEQUENCE-NUMBERS command. I highly
recommend having timestamps on log messages,
although I don’t think sequence numbers
are as important. Okay, that’s all for the
quiz. Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson ExSim practice question.
So, this is a drag and drop simulator question,
so I'll click on this button to open it up.
And here it is. Select the Syslog message
logging keywords from the left and drag them
to the corresponding Syslog levels on the
right. Okay, so I have said this multiple
times, but this is very important, that you
know all of these levels for the CCNA exam.
So pause the video now and try to do that.
Okay let's check. So, first level 0. This
is the most severe. So the number is lower
but the severity level is the highest. And
that is emergencies. Next one after that is
number 1, alerts. And the critical, number
2. Errors, next level 4 is warnings. After
that, notifications, or notices. And then
level 6 is informational and level 7 is debugging.
So, if it helps you remember that, use the
mnemonic 'every awesome Cisco engineer will
need ice cream daily'. So, I personally don't
really use mnemonics but I know a lot of people
do, so if that helps you remember these seven
(*eight!) levels, you can use that one. Okay,
so I'll click on done and then let's check.
So the answer is correct, there it is. And
as always Boson has a great explanation down
here, detailing the levels, some information
about filtering the levels on the console,
to the server. And some other extra information.
There is also a reference here to some Cisco
documentation about the message logging level
keywords. So, if you google this title here
you'll probably find it because this documentation
is available for free online from Cisco, and
it's another great study resource. Okay so
that was a question from Boson Software's
ExSim for CCNA. These are without a doubt
the best practice exams for the CCNA and I
highly recommend them. If you want to get
Boson ExSim, please follow the link in the
video description.
There are supplementary materials for this
video. There is a flashcard deck to use with
the software ‘Anki’. There will also be
a packet tracer practice lab so you can get
some hands-on practice. That will be in the
next video. Sign up for my mailing list via
the link in the description, and I’ll send
you all of the flashcards and packet tracer
lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members. To join,
please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to Kenneth, Seamus, H W,
Brandon, Samil, Aaron, Tech Alameda, Marcel,
Kone, Donald, C Mohd, Gustavo, Anthony, Biraj,
Junhong, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Apogee, Marko, Daming, Jhilmar,
Ed, Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark,
Yousif, Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan,
and Vance. Sorry if I pronounced your name
incorrectly, but thank you so much for your
support. This is the list of JCNP-level members
at the time of recording by the way, February
13th 2021. If you signed up recently and your
name isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll
be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please subscribe to
the channel, like the video, leave a comment,
and share the video with anyone else studying
for the CCNA. If you want to leave a tip,
check the links in the description. I'm also
a Brave verified publisher and accept BAT,
or Basic Attention Token, tips via the Brave
browser. That's all for now.