Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA.
It’s a network simulator with tons of guided
labs covering all of the topics you need to
know for the CCNA.
Click the link in the video description to
check it out.
In this lab we’ll do some basic QoS configurations
on R1.
The design and configuration of QoS isn’t
actually a CCNA exam topic, so you don’t
have to worry about remembering these configurations
for now.
But I think doing some basic configurations
in a lab will help you understand how QoS
works, so let’s do it.
In this network we have PC1 connected to R1
via SW1.
On the other side there is SRV1 connected
to R2 via SW2.
Although I’ve only shown 1 PC, let’s say
there are many more connected to R1 and the
network is getting congested.
So, we will configure QoS on R1 to ensure
the more important traffic receives high-priority
treatment.
We will mark HTTPS traffic as AF31 and ensure
that it gets a minimum of 10% bandwidth in
a priority queue.
We will mark HTTP traffic as AF32 and ensure
that it gets a minimum of 10% bandwidth, but
it will not be in a priority queue.
We will mark ICMP traffic as CS2 and ensure
that it gets a minimum of 5% bandwidth.
Now, the actual QoS design of a network depends
entirely on the network.
Which traffic needs to be prioritized, how
much bandwidth it needs, etc, varies greatly.
These values I selected are honestly just
random values so I can show you the basic
configuration commands.
Giving HTTPS traffic a priority queue, for
example, is probably not so common.
Usually priority queues are used for voice
traffic.
Anyway, after configuring the QoS rules we
will apply them to traffic being forwarded
out of R1’s G0/0/0 interface.
So, when R1 forwards traffic out of G0/0/0
to R2, it will be prioritized according to
our configurations.
Now, once the traffic reaches R2 that’s
a different story.
Even if R1 marks the packets as high priority,
unless R2 is also configured to treat those
packets as high priority, it will treat them
all equally.
In the CCNA exam topics, it is stated that
you must be able to explain the PHB, per-hop
behavior, of QoS.
Well, this is the per hop behavior.
We configure QoS on R1 and it will prioritize
certain types of traffic over the hop to R2,
but then how R2 prioritizes traffic over the
next hop depends on the configuration of R2.
You can’t just configure one router to prioritize
voice traffic and then expect the rest of
the network to also prioritize it.
You have to configure QoS all across the network,
wherever it’s needed.
Okay, I just wanted to make that clear since
I didn’t clearly explain the per-hop behavior
of QoS in the lecture videos.
To show you the basic QoS configurations,
though, we’ll just configure R1.
Before configuration, though, let me show
you the default markings of traffic being
forwarded from R1.
I’ll go on PC1.
First, let me try to ping jeremysitlab.com.
PING jeremysitlab.com.
So, PC1 will send a DNS query to its DNS server,
which is SRV1 at 10.0.0.100, and then it will
learn the IP address of jeremysitlab.com,
which in this case is also 10.0.0.100, and
then PC1 will ping SRV1.
As you can see, the pings work.
Now let’s switch to simulation mode, and
ping again.
PING jeremysitlab.com.
In reality PC1 should store the IP address
of jeremysitlab.com in its DNS cache, but
it seems that doesn’t work in packet tracer,
so it sends the DNS query again.
Anyway, lets go to the point where the ICMP
packet is at R1.
And now let’s check that packet, and click
on outbound PDU details.
So, this is the state of the packet as it
is going to be forwarded by R1.
Notice the DSCP field is written as hexadecimal
00.
Technically, two hexadecimal digits is 8 bits,
but really the DSCP field is just 6 bits.
And in packet tracer, the ECN field isn’t
displayed.
Anyway, since the field is displayed in hexadecimal
here we’ll have to do some conversions later
when we check the markings, but for now just
notice that the DSCP field isn’t marked,
it’s 0, default forwarding.
This is how PCs send their traffic by default,
and the switches and routers won’t add any
markings by default.
For time’s sake I won’t show you HTTP
and HTTPS now, but they would also have a
DSCP value of 0.
Okay, now let’s configure QoS, I’ll go
on R1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. So, there are three main steps to
configure QoS.
First, you have to identify the traffic.
In order to give special treatment for certain
kinds of traffic, you have tell the router
what kinds of traffic you want to give that
special treatment to.
To identify traffic in a Cisco IOS QoS configuration,
we use class maps.
The command is CLASS-MAP.
I will call this first class map HTTPS_MAP,
since we will use it to match HTTPS traffic.
Then I will enter MATCH PROTOCOL HTTPS.
And that’s it.
So, this class map can be used to identify
HTTPS traffic, and now I’ll exit out.
Let’s make another class map.
CLASS-MAP HTTP_MAP.
I’ll use this to match HTTP traffic.
MATCH PROTOCOL HTTP.
EXIT.
And one more, we’ll match ICMP traffic.
CLASS-MAP ICMP_MAP.
MATCH PROTOCOL ICMP.
EXIT.
Okay, let’s check those class maps.
DO SHOW RUN | SECTION CLASS-MAP.
There are the three class maps I configured.
Notice that, although I only typed CLASS-MAP
HTTPS_MAP, CLASS-MAP HTTP_MAP, and CLASS-MAP
ICMP_MAP, the default mode of MATCH-ALL was
applied.
This means that, to match this class map,
traffic has to match all of the MATCH statements
in that class map.
In this case, each class map only has one
MATCH statement, so it doesn’t matter, but
if there are multiple match statements you
can also use MATCH-ANY mode, which means traffic
will match that class map even if it matches
only one of the MATCH statements in the class
map.
So you could, for example, make a class map
with two match statements, MATCH PROTOCOL
HTTPS and MATCH PROTOCOL HTTP.
In that case, if a packet is either an HTTPS
packet or an HTTP packet, it would match that
class map.
Anyway, let’s move on.
So, that’s the first step of QoS configuration.
Identify the kinds of traffic you want to
apply special treatment to.
Next, we have to specify what kind of treatment
we want to give to each kind of traffic.
To do that we use policy maps.
The command is POLICY-MAP, and I’ll name
it G0/0/0_OUT, since we will later apply this
policy map outbound on the G0/0/0 interface.
Then I’ll use CLASS, followed by the name
of one of the class maps I just configured,
HTTPS_MAP.
Okay, now we can tell R1 what to do with traffic
that matches this class map.
First, SET IP DSCP AF31.
So, it will mark any HTTPS packets with a
DSCP value of AF31.
Then, we’ll give HTTPS a priority queue
with at least 10% of the links bandwidth during
periods of congestion.
PRIORITY PERCENT 10.
Okay, that’s all for the HTTPS class.
EXIT.
Now for HTTP traffic.
CLASS HTTP_MAP.
SET IP DSCP AF32.
And now we’ll give it a minimum bandwidth
of 10% during times of congestion, but it
won’t be a priority queue.
BANDWIDTH PERCENT 10.
EXIT.
Finally, ICMP.
CLASS ICMP_MAP.
SET IP DSCP CS2.
And we’ll give it 5% of bandwidth.
BANDWIDTH PERCENT 5.
EXIT, and EXIT again.
Okay let’s check that configuration.
DO SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG | SECTION POLICY-MAP.
So, here’s how this QoS configuration works.
We haven’t actually applied it outbound
on G0/0/0 yet, but after we do it will check
all traffic that is to be forwarded out of
G0/0/0.
If its an HTTPS packet, it will mark it as
DSCP AF31, and give it a priority queue with
at least 10% of the link’s bandwidth.
If it’s an HTTP packet it will mark it as
DSCP AF32 and give it a queue with at least
10% of the link’s bandwidth.
If it’s ICMP traffic it will mark the packet
as DSCP CS2 and give it a queue with at least
5% of the link’s bandwidth.
All other traffic, not matching any of these,
will not be marked and will be forwarded without
any special QoS treatment.
Okay, finally let’s apply this policy map
using a service policy.
INTERFACE G0/0/0.
SERVICE-POLICY OUTPUT,and then the policy
map’s name, G0/0/0_OUT.
That’s it, our QoS configuration is complete.
END.
SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG.
For review, here are the class maps, identifying
the types of traffic we want to match.
Below them is the policy map, which sets the
actions we want to take on the traffic matched
in the class maps.
Finally, I used a service policy to apply
the policy map outbound on G0/0/0.
Now let’s send some traffic from PC1 to
SRV1 and check the markings.
Let me switch to simulation mode.
First, I’ll ping SRV1.
If I use the name jeremysitlab.com it’ll
send a DNS request first, so I’ll just use
the IP address.
PING 10.0.0.100.
Let’s bring the packet to R1, and then check.
In the inbound PDU details tab, the DSCP marking
is 0, but if we check outbound, which is the
state of the packet as it is forwarded by
R1, the marking is now hexadecimal 1 0.
Let me open up this document to show the calculations.
So, we marked it as CS2, and here’s the
binary, 010 000, which is 16 in decimal.
In hexadecimal that is 1 0, so that’s why
we see 1 0 in the DSCP field in packet tracer.
Okay, now let’s send some HTTP traffic from
PC1 to SRV1.
I’ll return to realtime mode, then I’ll
exit out of the command prompt, and then click
on web browser.
I’ll enter the URL here, HTTP://10.0.0.100.
Now, let me switch back to simulation mode.
Now I’ll hit GO in the browser.
Okay, let’s bring the packet to R1, and
then check again.
Inbound PDU details, the marking is 0.
Outbound, and it’s 1c.
Okay we marked it as AF32, let’s check the
math.
Here it is in binary, 011 100.
That’s 28 in decimal, 16+8+4, which is 1c
in hexadecimal, and that’s what’s displayed
in packet tracer.
Okay, I’ll return to realtime mode.
Finally let’s send some HTTPS traffic.
I’ll go back to the web browser, and add
an S after HTTP.
Then I’ll switch back to simulation mode
and hit GO in the browser.
Bring the packet to R1, and let’s check.
So, inbound PDU details, the DSCP marking
is 0.
But outbound, R1 has marked it as DSCP 1A,
which should be AF31.
Let’s check the math.
So, here’s AF31 in binary, 011 010.
That’s 26 in decimal, 16 + 8 + 2.
Convert that to hexadecimal and you get 1A,
and that’s what was displayed in packet
tracer.
Okay, in this lab we took a look at QoS configuration.
Once again, you don’t need to know this
for the CCNA exam, but hopefully it was helpful
to see some basic QoS configurations.
Class maps identify traffic, policy maps specify
what actions to take on that traffic, and
service policies apply the policy maps to
interfaces.
That’s all for this lab.
Usually, we’d take a look at a lab in Boson
NetSim next, but since QoS configuration isn’t
a CCNA exam topic there are no QoS labs in
NetSim for CCNA.
Plus, I think this lab video has been long
enough, so that’s all for now.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Khoa, Justin, Christopher, Sam,
Anton, Tebogo, Samil, Anand, Pavel, Abraham,
Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Raj, Kenneth,
Seamus, Brandon, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd,
Gustavo, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko,
Daming, Ed, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum,
Mark, Yousif, Boson Software, Devin, Yonatan,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, April 29th
2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.