Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover security fundamentals.
The CCNA is not a cybersecurity certification,
but it requires candidates to learn some fundamentals
of network and system security necessary to
work as an IT professional.
Here are the exam topics we’ll cover in
this video.
We’ll define some key security concepts,
security program elements, talk about passwords
and user authentication, and define the AAA
concepts of authentication, authorization,
and accounting.
That seems like a lot for one video, and it
is.
This video will be a brief introduction to
a lot of different security topics.
If you haven’t studied this material before,
there will be a lot of new terms to learn
and memorize.
So I recommend taking notes to keep all of
the information organized.
Here’s what we’ll cover in specific.
First I’ll introduce some key security concepts
and terms.
Then some common attacks which can target
an enterprise’s systems and information.
Then I’ll talk about passwords and multi-factor
authentication.
Then the concepts of Authentication, Authorization,
and Accounting, also known as AAA.
Finally I’ll introduce security programs
which should be implemented by enterprises
to secure their systems and educate their
staff.
Watch until the end of the video for a bonus
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for
CCNA.
So, the title of this slide is ‘why security?’
What is the purpose or goal of security in
an enterprise?
I’m sure you can think of some reasons why
an enterprise would want its information and
systems to be secure, but it’s good to have
a framework.
The principles of the CIA triad form the foundation
of security.
We’re not talking about the American Central
Intelligence Agency.
Here’s what CIA stands for in this case.
C stands for confidentiality.
What does that mean?
It means that only authorized users should
be able to access data.
Some information and data is public and can
be accessed by anyone, for example information
put on the company website, but some is secret
and should only be accessed by specific people.
And there are degrees in the middle, some
information is more secret, some is less secret.
Then, I stands for integrity.
This means that data should not be tampered
with, should not be modified, by unauthorized
users.
Data should be correct and authentic, not
modified by an attacker.
Finally, A stands for availability.
This means that the enterprise network and
systems should be operational and accessible
to authorized users.
For example, staff should be able to access
the internal resources they need to perform
their duties, and the company’s website
should be up and running and available to
customers.
So, that’s the CIA triad.
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
Attackers can threaten the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of an enterprises’
systems and information.
We’ll see how attackers do that when we
look at some common attacks.
In addition to the CIA triad, there are some
fundamental security concepts you should understand,
and these are explicitly stated in the exam
topics.
First, a vulnerability is any potential weakness
that can compromise the CIA of a system or
information.
But keep in mind, a potential weakness on
its own isn’t a problem.
The windows of a house for example are vulnerabilities,
potential weaknesses, but houses continue
to have windows.
Next, an exploit is something that can potentially
be used to exploit the vulnerability.
But again, something that can potentially
be used as an exploit isn’t a problem on
it’s own.
A rock can exploit the weakness of a window
and be used to enter a house, but rocks aren’t
problems on their own.
Next, a threat is the potential of a vulnerability
to be exploited.
This ties it all together.
To use the window and rock analogy, a threat
is a robber wants to use a rock to break a
window and enter your house.
Here’s a more relevant example.
A hacker exploiting a vulnerability in your
system is a threat.
Finally, a mitigation technique is something
that can protect against threats.
There are various mitigation techniques and
they depend on the threat that is being defended
against, and we’ll cover some techniques
in this video and the next few videos on security.
Appropriate mitigation techniques should be
implemented everywhere a vulnerability can
be exploited, for example client devices,
servers, switches, routers, firewalls.
In addition, mitigation techniques include
things like preventing unauthorized people
from getting physical access to the devices
by keeping them in a secure rack behind a
secure door, etc.
But always remember, no system is perfectly
secure.
Systems can be more secure or less secure,
but there are no guarantees in security.
You can, for example, implement malware detection
on your network firewall and have the best
antivirus software on client PCs, but the
chance of the PCs getting infected with malware
is never 0.
Now let’s review some common attacks.
These are threats which can potentially exploit
vulnerabilities to compromise the confidentiality,
integrity, or availability, CIA, of an enterprise’s
systems and information.
These are the kinds of attacks we will look
at.
There are many more potential attacks than
just these, but these are some of the main
attack categories.
Let’s take a brief look at each one individually.
The first kind of attack is the denial-of-service,
DoS, attack.
DoS attacks threaten the availability of a
system, the A of the CIA triad.
There are many kinds, and I’ll show a few
of them, but one common DoS attack is the
TCP SYN flood, which exploits the TCP three-way
handshake.
As you know, the three-way handshake is SYN,
SYN-ACK, and ACK.
In a TCP SYN flood, the attacker sends countless
TCP SYN messages to the target.
The target sends a SYN-ACK message in response
to each SYN it receives.
But the attacker never replies with the final
ACK of the handshake.
This final ACK is never sent.
The target waits for the final ACK of each
handshake, and the incomplete connections
fill up the target’s TCP connection table.
The incomplete connections will timeout and
be removed from the table after a certain
period of time, but the attacker continues
sending SYN messages to fill up the table.
In the end, the target is no longer able to
make legitimate TCP connections because its
has reached the maximum number of TCP connections
it can maintain.
Let me demonstrate with a diagram.
For each SYN message the attacker sends, the
target puts an entry in its TCP connection
table and sends a SYN-ACK message, then waits
for an ACK to complete the connection.
But the ACK never comes.
The attacker keeps sending SYN messages, and
the target keeps sending SYN-ACK messages.
Then the target’s TCP connection table fills
up, and the denial-of-service has been achieved.
By the way, why do you think I drew the SYN-ACK
arrows not reaching the attacker?
It’s because the attacker likely spoofs
their IP address, meaning they use a fake
IP address, so the SYN-ACK messages don’t
return back to them.
I’ll talk about spoof attacks after DoS
attacks.
However, a denial-of-service like that is
usually not done by a single attacker.
A much more powerful kind of attack is the
DDoS.
In a DDoS, distributed denial-of-service,
attack, the attacker infects many target computers
with malware and uses them all to initiate
a denial-of-service attack, for example a
TCP SYN flood attack.
This group of infected computers is called
a botnet.
So, in this example the attacker could, through
separate attacks, infect these PCs with malware.
Then, all together they start flooding the
target with TCP SYN messages, so the target
server is no longer able to respond to legitimate
TCP connection requests.
So, to summarize denial-of-service attacks,
they attack the availability of a system,
the A of the CIA triad.
Next let’s look at spoofing attacks.
To spoof an address is to use a fake source
address, for example a fake IP or MAC address.
There are numerous attacks that involve spoofing,
it’s not a single kind of attack.
An example of a spoofing attack is a DHCP
exhaustion attack.
Actually, it’s similar to the TCP SYN flood
attack.
An attacker uses spoofed MAC addresses to
flood DHCP Discover messages.
Then, the target server’s DHCP pool becomes
full, resulting in a denial-of-service to
other devices.
They won’t be able to get an IP address.
Note that spoofing attacks don’t have to
be denial-of-service attacks, but this type
is.
Let me demonstrate.
The attacker sends a DHCP discover message
with a fake source MAC address.
Then it sends another with a different fake
source MAC address.
Then it does it again, with another fake source
MAC address.
It keeps sending these at a very quick pace.
The server will reply to each Discover with
a DHCP Offer message, and while it is offering
an IP address it will not assign that address
to other devices.
So, if these PCs send DHCP discover messages
to get IP addresses, the server is not able
to give them their IP addresses because its
DHCP pool is full.
Maybe it had 250 IP addresses to lease to
clients, but they are all taken by the attacker.
So, that’s just one example of a spoofing
attack.
And in the previous TCP SYN flood example,
source IP addresses were spoofed too, so actually
it’s also a spoofing attack.
And this DHCP exhaustion attack resulted in
a denial-of-service, so it’s a DoS attack,
too.
As you can see, some of these attack types
are connected and related, they aren’t totally
separate.
But once again, we are attacking the availability,
the A of the CIA triad.
Note that not all spoofing attacks are DoS
attacks.
Later I’ll show another type of spoofing
attack that targets the confidentiality and
integrity of a system, not the availability.
Next let’s look at reflection and amplification
attacks.
In a reflection attack, the attacker sends
traffic to what’s called a reflector, and
spoofs the source address of its packets using
the target’s IP address.
Then the reflector, for example a DNS server,
sends the reply to the target’s IP address.
So, what’s the purpose of this attack?
Well, if the amount of traffic is large enough
this can result in a denial-of-service to
the target.
But, there is a more powerful form of reflection
attack called an amplification attack.
A reflection attack becomes an amplification
attack when the amount of traffic sent by
the attacker is small, but it triggers a large
amount of traffic to be sent from the reflector
to the target.
This is how it can trigger a denial of service.
Let me demonstrate again.
The attacker’s IP address is 1.2.3.4, but
it uses source IP address 5.6.7.8 to send
a message to a server at 8.8.8.8, which becomes
the reflector.
5.6.7.8 is the IP address of the target of
the attack.
The attacker’s message causes the reflector
to send a large amount of traffic to the target,
resulting in a denial of service.
For example, there are DNS and NTP vulnerabilities
which can be exploited for amplification attacks
like this.
You can check out these cloudflare articles
to read about them.
Do a google search for ‘DNS amplification
attack’ or ‘NTP amplification attack’
and you’ll find these articles.
The next type of attack is the man-in-the-middle
attack.
In this kind of attack, the attacker places
himself between the source and destination
to eavesdrop on communications, or to modify
traffic before it reaches the destination.
A common example is ARP spoofing, also known
as ARP poisoning.
So, this is yet another kind of spoofing attack.
In an ARP spoofing attack, a host sends an
ARP request asking for the MAC address of
another device.
In this case, PC1 is asking for the MAC address
of 10.0.0.1, which is SRV1.
Because ARP request messages are broadcast,
the switch floods the frame, so both SRV1
and the attacker receive it.
Then the target of the ARP request, SRV1 in
this case, sends an ARP reply to inform the
requester, PC1, of SRV1’s MAC address.
But here’s the attack.
The attacker waits briefly and then sends
another ARP reply after the legitimate replier.
So, what’s the effect of this?
If the attacker’s ARP reply arrives last,
it will overwrite the legitimate ARP entry
in PC1’s ARP table.
So, what happens next?
Well, now in PC1’s ARP table, the entry
for 10.0.0.1 will have the attacker’s MAC
address, not the address of the real 10.0.0.1,
which is SRV1.
So, when PC1 tries to send traffic to SRV1,
it will be forwarded to the attacker instead.
Then, the attacker can inspect the messages,
read their contents and then forward them
on to SRV1.
Or, another possibility is that the attacker
can also modify the messages before forwarding
them to SRV1.
So, in this example the threat isn’t to
the availability of the CIA triad, this kind
of attack compromises the confidentiality
and integrity, the C and I of the CIA triad,
of the communications between PC1 and SRV1.
It compromises the confidentiality because
an unauthorized user, the attacker, has access
to the communications between PC1 and SRV1.
And it compromises the integrity because that
unauthorized user can also modify the data
before it reaches the destination.
Next let’s look at reconnaissance attacks.
These attacks aren’t attacks themselves,
but they are used to gather information about
a target which can be used for a future attack.
This is often publicly available information,
which is why it’s not really an attack itself,
the information isn’t actually confidential.
For example, you can perform an NSLOOKUP to
learn the IP address of a site.
From there, you can probe for open ports which
are potential vulnerabilities.
You could also perform a WHOIS query to learn
email addresses, phone numbers, physical addresses,
etc.
You can perform a WHOIS query at this website
here, for example I did a lookup of my own
website.
Once contact information is known, some of
the so-called ‘social engineering’ attacks
which we’ll look at soon can be carried
out to threaten the target enterprise.
Next up is malware, something you’ve probably
heard of.
Malware, which means malicious software, refers
to a variety of harmful programs that can
infect a computer.
Here are a few types.
Viruses are malware that infects other software,
called a host program.
The virus spreads as the software is shared
by users, or downloaded from malicious websites,
etc.
Once the virus has infected the device it
can do various harmful things, such as corrupting
or modifying files on the target computer.
Then there are worms, which are different
than viruses in that they don’t require
a host program.
They are standalone malware and are also able
to spread on their own, without user interaction.
The spread of worms from device to device
can congest the network, but in addition to
that if the worm has a ‘payload’, other
malicious code within the worm, it can cause
additional harm to target devices.
Another famous kind of malware is the trojan
horse, which is harmful software disguised
as legitimate software.
Trojan horses spread through user interaction
such as opening email attachments or downloading
a file from the Internet.
Note that these types of malware are defined
mostly by how the malware infects a system
and how it spreads, not the attacks they carry
out after infecting the system.
The above malware types can exploit various
vulnerabilities to threaten any of the CIA
triad of the target device.
And as I said before, there are many types
of malware, these three are just a few large
categories of malware.
Next up is a very dangerous category of attack,
social engineering.
Social engineering attacks target the most
vulnerable part of any system, the people.
This is something you have to be aware of
when designing a security policy.
No matter how many security features you configure
on your routers, switches, firewalls, servers,
PCs, etc, people are always a vulnerability
that can be exploited.
Social engineering attacks involve psychological
manipulation to make the target reveal confidential
information or perform some action the attacker
tells the target to do.
As with the previous attack types, there are
various kinds of social engineering attacks.
Here are a few common ones.
Phishing involves fraudulent emails that appear
to come from a legitimate business, maybe
Amazon, your bank, or your credit card company,
for example.
These emails contain links to a fraudulent
website that seems legitimate.
For example, the website may look identical
to the real login page of your bank’s website.
Users are told to login to the fraudulent
website, therefore providing their login credentials
to the attacker.
Spear phishing is a type of phishing that
is more targeted.
Not mass emails sent out to anybody, but perhaps
emails sent to employees of a specific company,
for example.
Whaling is another kind of phishing targeted
at high-profile individuals, for example a
company president.
There is also vishing, voice phishing, which
is phishing performed over the phone.
The attacker could pretend to be from the
target’s bank, or maybe another department
in the company.
They might say something like, Hi this is
Jeremy from the IT department.
Due to company policy we need to reset your
password, could you tell me the password you’re
currently using and I’ll reset it for you?’
Now, I’m sure a real attacker would be more
convincing than that, but that’s just an
example.
Another kind is smishing, SMS phishing, which
is phishing performed using SMS text messages
to the target’s cell phone.
Okay, let’s move on from phishing, because
there are other kinds of social engineering
attacks.
Watering hole attacks compromise sites that
the target victim frequently visits.
If a malicious link is placed on a website
the target trusts, they might not hesitate
to click it.
So, this kind of attack is taking advantage
of the user’s trust in the website they
frequently visit, they don’t think twice
about clicking the link.
Okay, I want to mention one more kind of social
engineering.
Tailgating attacks involve entering restricted,
secure areas by simply walking in behind an
authorized person as they enter.
Any company that has restricted areas will
have rules against this, but often the target
will hold the door open for the attacker to
be polite, assuming the attacker is also authorized
to enter.
To summarize social engineering attacks, they
are attacks that don’t directly exploit
a company’s IT systems, instead they exploit
the employees.
Here’s an example of a phishing email.
It says that the target’s Amazon account
has been locked due to a suspicious login,
and there is a link at the bottom requesting
that the target verify their account information.
If the target clicks on that link and enters
their login information, the attacker now
has access to their Amazon account.
Anyone who has an email address has seen emails
like this, I’m sure.
It’s something we all have to watch out
for.
Okay, the final kind of attack we’ll look
at are password-related attacks.
Most systems use a username and password combination
to authenticate users.
The username itself is often simple and easy
to guess, for example the user’s email address.
So, the strength and secrecy of the password
is relied on to provide the necessary security.
However, attackers can learn a user’s password
through multiple methods.
First of all, they could simply guess the
password.
Now, successfully guessing a password should
be extremely rare, but it is a possibility.
A dictionary attack can also be used, in which
a program runs through a dictionary, which
is a list of common words and passwords to
guess the target’s password.
It tries each one, hoping to find the correct
password.
A brute force attack involves trying every
possible combination of letters, numbers,
and special characters to find the target’s
password.
This requires a very powerful computer, and
if the password is sufficiently strong, the
chances of it working are very low, because
it takes so much time.
So, what makes a password strong, so that
it can’t easily be brute-forced?
Well, strong passwords should contain at least
8 characters.
Definitely not less, but preferably more than
8.
The more characters, the harder it is to brute
force attack the password.
A strong password should have a mix of uppercase
and lowercase letters and a mixture of letters
and numbers.
Also it should have one or more special characters
such as question marks, exclamation points,
etc.
Finally it should be changed regularly.
Most enterprises will enforce rules like these
on their employees, but it’s also recommended
that you follow rules like these when making
your own personal passwords.
Okay, that was a lot of potential attacks.
To help you review, here’s a basic summary
of each attack.
If you want to know more about each kind of
attack, a Google search will give you all
kinds of great resources.
For our purposes, just a basic understanding
of each attack type is sufficient for now.
So, make sure you know these basic attack
types.
Next let’s continue with the topic of multi-factor
authentication.
No matter how secure the password, there is
still a chance it gets into the hands of an
attacker.
That’s why multi-factor authentication is
becoming more and more wide-spread.
Multi-factor authentication involves providing
more than just a username and password to
prove your identity.
It usually involves providing two of the following,
in which case it’s called two-factor authentication.
First is something you know, for example a
username and password combination or a PIN.
Next is something you have, for example pressing
a notification that appears on your phone
using an authenticator app, or perhaps a badge
that is scanned.
The third is something you are, these are
unique characteristics about you.
For example, biometrics such as a face scan,
palm scan, fingerprint scan, retina scan,
etc.
Requiring multiple factors of authentication
greatly increases the security.
Even if an attacker learns the target’s
password, they won’t be able to login to
the target’s account.
Another form of authentication involves the
use of digital certificates, which are used
to prove the identity of the holder of the
certificate.
They are mainly, but not exclusively, used
for websites to verify that the website being
accessed is legitimate.
Entities that want a certificate, for example
a company with a website, send a CSR, certificate
signing request, to a CA, certificate authority,
which will generate and sign the certificate.
When you access a website, modern browsers
display a symbol here to indicate that the
website is secure and has a valid certificate.
As you can see, my website has a valid certificate,
and if you click on it you will be able to
inspect the certificate.
This is how you can know that the website
you’re accessing is really jeremysitlab.com,
not a fake website pretending to be jeremysitlab.com.
I’ve been mentioning authentication a lot,
and that’s one part of an important framework
you need to know for the CCNA.
AAA stands for Authentication, Authorization,
and Accounting.
It’s a framework for controlling and monitoring
users of a computer system, such as a network.
So, what do each of those A’s mean?
Authentication is the process of verifying
a user’s identity.
When a user logs in, ideally using multi-factor
authentication, that’s authentication.
Then, Authorization is the process of granting
the user the appropriate access and permissions.
So, granting the user access to some files
and services, but restricting access to other
files and services, is authorization.
Finally, accounting is the process of recording
the user’s activities on the system.
For example, logging when a user makes a change
to a file, or recording when a users logs
in or logs out, is accounting.
Enterprises typically use a AAA server to
provide AAA services.
ISE, Identity Services Engine, is Cisco’s
AAA server, for example.
These AAA servers typically support the following
two AAA protocols.
RADIUS, which is an open standard protocol
and uses UDP ports 1812 and 1813.
And TACACS+, which is a Cisco proprietary
protocol and uses TCP port 49.
Just in case, I recommend remembering the
names of these protocols and their ports,
but for the CCNA that’s all you need to
know about them.
However, make sure you know the differences
between authentication, authorization, and
accounting.
They are stated directly in the exam topics
list.
Okay, the final topic for today is security
program elements.
A security program is an enterprise’s set
of security policies and procedures.
For the CCNA, there are a few elements you
have to be aware of.
First up, user awareness programs.
These are designed to make employees aware
of potential security threats and risks.
Not all employees are cyber-security experts.
Someone working in the HR department is probably
not aware of all of the cyber threats the
company is facing.
So, user awareness programs will help make
those employees aware.
For example, a company might send out false
phishing emails to make employees click a
link and sign in with their login credentials.
Although the emails are harmless, employees
who are tricked by the false emails will be
informed that it is part of a user awareness
program, and they should be more careful about
phishing emails.
So, that’s an example of a user awareness
program.
User training programs are more formal than
user awareness programs.
For example, dedicated training sessions which
educate users on the corporate security policies,
how to create strong passwords, and how to
avoid potential threats.
These should happen when employees enter the
company, and also at regular intervals during
the year.
Another essential element of a security program
is physical access control, which protects
equipment and data from potential attackers
by only allowing authorized users into protected
areas such as network closets or data center
floors.
This is not just to prevent people outside
of the organization from gaining access to
these areas.
Even within the company, access to these areas
should be limited to those who need access.
Multifactor locks can protect access to these
restricted areas.
For example, a door that requires users to
swipe a badge and scan their fingerprint to
enter.
That’s something you have, a badge, and
something you are, your fingerprint.
Badge systems are very flexible, and permissions
granted to a badge can easily be changed.
For example, permissions can be easily removed
when an employee leaves the company, whether
they return the badge or not.
This allows for strict, centralized control
of who is authorized to enter where.
Okay, before moving on to the quiz let’s
review what we covered.
First we covered some key security concepts
including the CIA triad as well as vulnerabilities,
exploits, threats, and mitigation techniques.
Then we looked at some common attacks, from
common network attacks to social engineering
attacks which target people, not devices.
Then passwords and multi-factor authentication,
which includes a combination of something
you know, something you have, and something
you are.
Then I introduced AAA.
Authentication is the process of verifying
a user’s identity.
Authorization is the process of controlling
what that user is allowed to do in the system.
And accounting is keeping track of what the
user does.
Finally I introduced some elements of an enterprise’s
security programs, such as user awareness,
user training, and physical access control.
So, that was a lot to cover.
But if you learn the information in this video,
you should be ready to answer questions about
any of these exam topics.
In the next few videos we’ll take a closer
look at some network attacks and what we can
do to stop them.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which part of the CIA triad ensures that systems
are running and accessible by users?
Pause the video now to look at the options
and select the best answer.
Okay, the best answer is D, availability,
which means that systems should be operational
and accessible by users.
A, confidentiality, means that data should
only be accessible by authorized users.
B, integrity, means that data should only
be modified by authorized users.
C, E, and F are aspects of AAA, not the CIA
triad.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following terms refers to the
real possibility that a potential weakness
is taken advantage of to attack a system?
Pause the video now to look at the options
and select the best answer.
Okay, the best answer is A, threat.
A threat is the possibility that a vulnerability
is exploited by an attacker.
Mitigation techniques can be used to reduce
that possibility.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Your company implements door locks that require
a badge to be scanned and a pass code to be
entered.
What is this an example of?
(select the two best answers) Pause the video
now to look at the options and select the
two best answers.
Okay, the best answers are C, physical access
control and D, multi-factor authentication.
Physical access control allows only authorized
users to access restricted areas.
Multi-factor authentication uses a combination
of things to verify a user’s identity, in
this case something in the ‘something you
own’ category, the badge, and something
in the ‘something you know’ category,
the pass code.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following is NOT an example of
multi-factor authentication?
Pause the video now to look at the options
and select the best answer.
Okay, the best answer is C, doing a retina
scan and then doing a fingerprint scan.
Why is this not multifactor authentication,
even though you’re doing two things?
It’s because the key of multifactor authentication
is that you use at least two different categories
from something you know, have, and are.
A retina scan and a fingerprint scan both
fit in the ‘something you are’ category,
so this is not multifactor authentication.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following is considered Accounting
in the AAA model?
Pause the video now to look at the options
and select the best answer.
Okay, the best answer is D, logging the date
and time a user logged in to the system.
Accounting is all about keeping track of a
user’s actions.
A and C are examples of authorization, and
B is an example of authentication.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
This time there won’t be a packet tracer
practice lab.
Instead, I’ll do a bonus demo of one of
the attacks introduced in this video, the
DHCP starvation attack, using a Linux distribution
called Kali Linux.
That will be in the next video.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Khoa, Justin, Christopher, Sam,
Anton, Tebogo, Samil, Anand, Pavel, Abraham,
Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Raj, Kenneth,
Seamus, Brandon, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd,
Gustavo, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko,
Daming, Ed, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum,
Mark, Yousif, Boson Software, Devin, Yonatan,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, May 3rd
2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.