Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will talk about port security.
Port security is a security feature on Cisco
switches that allows you to control what source
MAC addresses are allowed on a switch port,
as well as how many MAC addresses are allowed
on a switch port.
It’s covered in exam topic 5.7, which says
you must be able to configure Layer 2 security
features, including DHCP snooping, ARP inspection,
and port security.
Those other two, DHCP snooping and ARP inspection,
will be covered in the next few videos.
But for this video, we’ll focus on port
security.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First, I’ll introduce what port security
is.
But knowing what it is isn’t enough.
I’ll also explain why we use port security,
what security benefits it offers.
And I’ll show you various port security
configuration commands, too.
As always, watch until the end of the video
for an awesome bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, my recommended practice exams
for the CCNA.
First up, what is port security?
Well, it’s a security feature of Cisco switches.
It allows you to control which source MAC
address, or addresses, are allowed to enter
a switchport.
So, it’s configured on a per-interface basis.
By the way, throughout this video I’ll probably
be using both terms, port and interface, but
I mean the same thing.
So, if a frame with an unauthorized source
MAC address enters the port, an action will
be taken.
There are a few possible actions that you
can configure, but the default action is to
place the interface in an err-disabled state.
In effect, this is like shutting down the
interface.
Traffic will no longer be sent or received
by that interface.
Let me demonstrate.
PC1 is connected to SW1’s G0/1 interface.
PC1’s MAC address is A.A.A.
As you know, MAC addresses are actually 12
hexadecimal characters, but I’ll shorten
them here to make it easier to read.
The user of PC1 brought in his personal laptop
to work, that’s PC2, and it has a MAC address
of B.B.B.
The network admin has configured port security
on SW1’s G0/1 interface, so it will only
allow frames with a source MAC address of
A.A.A to enter the G0/1 interface.
When PC1 sends a frame, SW1 will check the
source MAC address and see that it is A.A.A,
so it will forward it to the destination as
normal.
But the user unplugs the cable from PC1 and
then connects it to the laptop, PC2.
What will happen when PC2 sends a frame?
Well, SW1 will check the source MAC address
and notice that it is B.B.B, but only A.A.A
should be allowed.
So, SW1 will place G0/1 in an err-disabled
state.
It won’t send or receive data until you
enable the interface again.
Now, as I said there are a few possible actions
that can be taken and I’ll explain the others
later, but for now let’s assume the default
action of shutdown.
So, noticing that his laptop isn’t able
to communicate over the network, the user
unplugs the cable from his laptop and connects
it back to PC1.
What happens when PC1 sends a frame?
Well, the interface is still err-disabled,
so PC1 is also unable to communicate over
the network.
There are two ways to enable an interface
that has been disabled by port security, but
I’ll cover those later.
Okay let’s cover a few more points about
port security.
When you enable port security on an interface
with the default settings, one MAC address
is allowed.
You can configure the allowed MAC address
manually if you want.
But if you don’t configure it manually,
the switch will allow the first source MAC
address that enters the interface.
That MAC address will be allowed on the interface,
but all others will be unauthorized.
However, you can change the maximum number
of MAC addresses allowed.
Here’s one situation in which you should
increase the number of MAC addresses allowed
on the port.
Phone1 is directly connected to SW1, and PC1
is connected to phone1.
The default port security setting, which allows
one MAC address, isn’t going to work in
this situation, because both PC1 and phone1
are going to send traffic using their own
MAC address as the source, so that’s two
MAC addresses.
So, in this case let’s say we configured
SW1’s G0/1 interface to allow two MAC addresses.
But we didn’t configure them manually, we
will let SW1 dynamically learn which two MAC
addresses to allow.
So, if phone1 sends a frame SW1 will add it
to the list of allowed MAC addresses and forward
it as normal.
Then if PC1 sends a frame, SW1 will also add
that one to the list and it will be forwarded.
But now SW1’s G0/1 interface has reached
its maximum number of allowed MAC addresses,
since we configured it as 2.
If the interface is connected to another device
and it sends a frame, SW1 will shut down the
interface because the source MAC address isn’t
authorized.
Okay, in this introduced two main points.
First, the default number of allowed MAC addresses
is one when you enable port security, but
you can configure it to allow more.
Second, the allowed MAC addresses can be manually
configured or dynamically learned.
In this example, both were dynamically learned,
but for example we could have manually configured
SW1 to allow C.C.C on G0/1, and then allow
it to dynamically learn A.A.A when PC1 sends
a frame.
So, if more than one MAC address is allowed,
they don’t all have to be manually configured
or all have to be dynamically learned, a combination
is possible.
You can probably imagine how port security
could be useful, but let me briefly explain.
It’s useful because it allows network admins
to control which devices are allowed to access
the network.
Someone can’t just plug an unauthorized
device into a switchport and gain access to
the network.
However, MAC address spoofing is a simple
task.
It’s easy to configure a device to send
frames with a different source MAC address.
So, be aware that port security isn’t a
perfect solution in this regard.
But, rather than manually specifying the MAC
addresses allowed on each port, port security’s
ability to limit the number of MAC addresses
allowed on an interface is often more useful.
For example, think back to the DHCP starvation
attack carried out in the day 48 lab video.
The attacker spoofed thousands of fake MAC
addresses, and the DHCP server assigned IP
addresses to those fake MAC addresses, exhausting
the DHCP pool.
But not just that, switches can’t learn
an infinite number of MAC addresses, so the
switch’s MAC address table can also become
full due to such an attack.
Then the switch can no longer learn new MAC
addresses, and it will flood every packet
it receives.
Using port security to limit the number of
MAC addresses allowed on an interface can
protect against such attacks.
Both aspects of port security are useful:
controlling which MAC addresses are allowed
and controlling how many MAC addresses are
allowed, so we’ll continue to look at both
aspects.
Let’s move on.
Now, before going deeper into other areas
of port security, let’s cover the most basic
configurations.
Port security is enabled directly on the interface,
so I enter interface configuration mode for
G0/1 and try the command SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY.
However, it’s rejected with a message saying
that gigabitethernet0/1 is a dynamic port.
What does that mean?
To check I used SHOW INTERFACES G0/1 SWITCHPORT.
and here’s the answer.
By default, switchports have an administrative
mode of dynamic auto, that’s the DTP command
SWITCHPORT MODE DYNAMIC AUTO, I covered that
earlier in the course.
Port security can be enabled on access ports
or trunk ports, but they must be statically
configured as access or trunk.
Dynamic auto and dynamic desirable are not
allowed.
So, I used SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS to configure
it as a static access port.
Then I used SHOW INTERFACES G0/1 SWITCHPORT
again to check, and the administrative mode
is now static access, so the SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY
command should work.
And indeed it does, so port security is now
enabled on G0/1.
When you use just this command, port security
is enabled with the default settings.
Let’s check out those default settings.
The command SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE,
followed by the interface name, is very useful.
Let’s see what it shows.
First, port security is enabled, and the port
status is secure-up.
Secure-up just means port security is enabled,
and the interface is up.
The default violation mode is shutdown, as
I said before.
If an unauthorized frame enters the interface,
it will be err-disabled.
Here are some default settings regarding the
timers.
The aging time of 0 minutes means that the
addresses will never age out, there is no
timer.
But I’ll explain these later.
Here we can see information about the MAC
addresses.
The maximum is 1, currently it knows 0, 0
have been manually configured, and there are
0 sticky MAC addresses, that’s also something
I’ll mention later.
SW1 hasn’t received any traffic on this
interface yet, so the last source address
is all 0s, with VLAN number 0.
Finally, there have been no violations so
this counter here is at 0.
Now I sent a ping from PC1 to R1, let’s
see what happens to the output of this command.
I’ve highlighted the two places that have
changed.
Total MAC addresses has changed from 0 to
1, because SW1 learned PC1’s MAC address.
Note that the maximum is also 1, so SW1 won’t
be able learn any more MAC addresses on the
interface.
Also, the last source address has changed
to PC1’s MAC address, and the VLAN is 1,
the default VLAN.
Now let’s bring back PC2, and connect the
cable to it instead.
What will happen when PC2 tries to ping R1?
Here’s what happens.
From the top of the output, the port status
has changed from secure-up to secure-shutdown.
By the way, if you check SHOW INTERFACES STATUS,
you will the status err-disabled that I mentioned
earlier.
But in the SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE command,
it says secure-shutdown.
Also, the total MAC addresses count has reset
to 0.
So, it dynamically learned PC1’s MAC address
as a secure MAC address, but after the port
was shutdown it was cleared.
The last source address is PC2’s MAC address,
B.B.B.
And the security violation count is now 1.
Okay, so let’s see how to re-enable an interface
that has been disabled by port security.
Okay, here’s how to manually re-enable the
interface.
But before entering any commands, you should
first disconnect the unauthorized device.
After disconnecting the unauthorized device,
you should then enter the commands on the
interface.
SHUTDOWN, which puts it in administratively
disabled mode, and then the NO SHUTDOWN to
re-enable it.
Let’s check out SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE.
The port status is back to secure-up.
The last source address, which was PC2’s
MAC address before, has been erased.
And at the bottom, the security violation
count actually was reset too when the interface
came back up.
So, with the default violation mode, shutdown,
this security violation count shouldn’t
go higher than 1.
Now, there’s another way to re-enable an
err-disabled interface, that is ErrDisable
recovery.
It causes err-disabled interfaces to be automatically
re-enabled after a certain period of time.
There are actually various reasons an interface
can enter an err-disabled state.
I used the command SHOW ERRDISABLE RECOVERY,
which lists all of them.
There are so many that I had to omit a lot
of them, the output doesn’t fit on one screen.
On the left is each err-disable reason, and
on the right it will show whether or not err-disable
recovery is enabled.
By default, it is disabled for all reasons,
so err-disabled interfaces will not be automatically
recovered.
The one we’re looking for is psecure-violation,
that means port-security violation.
Notice the default timer is 300 seconds.
So, every 5 minutes by default, all err-disabled
interfaces will re-enabled, but only if err-disable
recovery has been enabled for the cause of
the interface’s disablement.
So, let’s enable it for port security violations.
Here’s how to enable it.
The command is ERRDISABLE RECOVERY CAUSE,
followed by the cause, which is PSECURE-VIOLATION
in this case.
And just to demonstrate the command, I shortened
the timer with ERRDISABLE RECOVERY INTERVAL,
and then specified 180 seconds.
Here’s SHOW ERRDISABLE RECOVERY again.
Notice that the psecure-violation recovery
timer is now enabled, and the timer interval
is 180 seconds, as configured.
And just to demonstrate I caused G0/1 to become
errdisabled again, and you can see that it
will be enabled at the next timeout, and there
are 149 seconds left.
So, this is a useful feature, but it’s useless
if you don’t remove the device that caused
the interface to enter the err-disabled state.
So, that will always be step 1.
Disconnect the unauthorized device, and then
either manually re-enable the interface, or
let errdisable recovery do it for you automatically.
What will happen if you don’t disconnect
the unauthorized device?
Well, if you manually configured the secure
MAC address, the interface will simply become
disabled again when it receives another frame
from the unauthorized device.
But if you let the switch dynamically learn
the previous secure MAC address, it is cleared
when the interface is disabled.
When the interface is re-enabled, the unauthorized
device’s MAC address might become the new
secure MAC address on the interface, which
is obviously not a good situation.
So, remember to disconnect the unauthorized
device.
Okay, now let’s talk about those violation
modes.
I just showed you the default mode, shutdown,
and how to re-enable an interface shutdown
by port security.
But there are three different violation modes
that determine what the switch will do if
an unauthorized frame enters an interface
configured with port security.
The first is the default, shutdown.
It effectively shuts down the port by placing
it in an err-disabled state if an unauthorized
frame enters the port.
It will also generate a Syslog and/or SNMP
message to let you know that port security
disabled the interface.
However, after the interface is down it won’t
continue generating messages even if the unauthorized
device continues trying to send traffic.
Only one message is generated to say that
the port was disabled.
The violation counter is set to 1 when the
interface is disabled, although it will be
reset to 0 when the interface is re-enabled,
as you saw before.
Okay, the next violation mode is restrict.
The switch will discard traffic from unauthorized
MAC addresses.
However, the interface is not disabled.
Devices with authorized MAC addresses will
still be able to use the interface.
The switch generates a syslog and/or SNMP
message each time an unauthorized MAC address
is detected.
And the violation counter is incremented by
1 for each unauthorized frame.
Okay, that’s restrict mode, now the last
one.
Protect mode.
Like restrict mode, the switch discards traffic
from unauthorized MAC addresses, and the interface
is not disabled.
However, it does not generate syslog or SNMP
messages for unauthorized traffic.
And it doesn’t increment the violation counter
either.
It just silently discards unauthorized traffic.
Okay, so we already saw the shutdown mode,
let’s look at the other two.
Here’s the restrict violation mode.
I’m starting from a fresh port-security
configuration, so first I enable port-security.
This time, I manually authorized PC1’s MAC
address with SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS,
followed by PC1’s MAC address.
And here’s how to enable restrict mode.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY VIOLATION RESTRICT.
Then I tried to ping R1 from PC2, and I got
a bunch of syslog messages like this, which
tells us that a security violation occurred,
caused by PC2’s MAC address, on the G0/1
interface.
Let’s check SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE.
First, notice the violation mode of restrict.
And you can see that the violation count has
gone to twelve because I tried to send traffic
from PC2.
However, the port status is secure-up, not
secure-shutdown.
So, if I were to connect the cable back to
PC1, it would still be able to send traffic,
no problem, because the interface is still
up and PC1’s MAC address is authorized.
Okay, that’s the restrict violation mode.
And here’s the last one, protect.
We’re starting with a fresh configuration
again for this example, so make sure to enable
port security.
I once again manually authorized PC1’s MAC
address.
And then I configured SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY
VIOLATION PROTECT.
And then sent some traffic from PC2.
PC2’s pings failed, but there were no syslog
messages on SW1.
Let’s check this command again.
The port status is secure-up, the violation
mode is protect, and the violation counter
is 0.
So, SW1 discarded the traffic from PC2, but
didn’t display any syslog messages or increment
the violation count.
That’s the protect violation mode.
OK, here’s that summary of the violation
modes again.
These are how you control what the switch
does when a port-security violation occurs.
You should definitely learn the actions taken
by each violation mode, and remember that
shutdown is the default mode.
Okay, moving down to the next part of the
SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE command, let’s
check out secure MAC address aging.
By the way, MAC addresses dynamically learned
or statically configured on a port-security
enabled port are called secure MAC addresses.
By default, secure MAC addresses will not
age out.
There is no timer, they are permanent unless
you manually delete the learned MAC address
or the port is disabled and then re-enabled.
That’s what the aging time of 0 minutes
means.
However, you can configure this timer with
the command SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY AGING
TIME, and then the time in minutes.
If you do configure an aging time, the default
aging type is absolute.
Let me explain what that means.
Absolute aging means that, after the secure
MAC address is learned, the aging timer starts
and the MAC address is removed after the timer
expires, even if the switch continues receiving
frames from that source MAC address while
it is counting down.
However, after the MAC address ages out it
can then immediately be re-learned if another
frame with that source MAC is received.
The other aging type is inactivity.
This is like regular MAC address aging.
After the MAC address is learned the aging
timer starts, but it is reset every time a
frame from that source MAC address is received.
So, if the switch keeps receiving frames from
that MAC address, it will never be aged out.
You can configure the aging type with SWITCHPORT
PORT-SECURITY AGING TYPE, and then absolute
or inactivity.
Now, by default only dynamically-learned secure
MAC addresses will age out.
If you configure a MAC with SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY
MAC-ADDRESS, which I showed you earlier, it
won’t age out.
The command will remain in the running-config
and the MAC will remain in the MAC address
table.
But with the command SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY
AGING STATIC, you can make the switch age
out static secure MAC addresses, too.
The command will be removed from the running
config and the address will be removed from
the MAC address table if it ages out.
Let me show you those commands in the CLI.
I configured an aging time of 30 minutes,
aging type of inactivity, and enabled aging
of static secure MAC addresses.
Then I checked SHOW PORT-SECURITY INTERFACE
G0/1 again, and you can see the output has
changed now.
Aging time 30 minutes, aging type inactivity,
and securestatic address aging enabled.
Okay, that’s all you really need to know
about the timers.
But before moving on to the next topic, let
me show you one more useful command.
SHOW PORT-SECURITY.
It displays which interfaces have port security
enabled, the max and current number of secure
addresses on those interfaces, their security
violation count, and their security action.
In this case, I only have port security enabled
on one port, but if you have it enabled on
many this is a useful command to get an overview
of your port security enabled interfaces.
Next, here’s the last major topic of the
video, sticky secure MAC addresses.
Sticky secure MAC address learning can be
enabled with the following command.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS STICKY.
When enabled, dynamically-learned secure MAC
addresses will be added to the running config
like this.
So, if you look in the running config you’ll
see a command like this automatically added,
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS STICKY,
and then the learned MAC address.
These sticky secure MAC addresses will never
age out, even if you enable static secure
MAC address aging.
However, because they are added to the running-config,
not the startup-config, you’ll need to save
the running-config to the startup-config to
make them truly permanent, for example with
the WRITE MEMORY command.
If you don’t do that, they will be lost
if the switch restarts, or is turned off and
then on again.
When you issue the SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY
MAC-ADDRESS sticky command, all current dynamically-learned
secure MAC addresses will be converted to
sticky secure MAC addresses.
So, they will be added to the running config.
The opposite is true, too.
If you remove sticky learning, sticky secure
MAC addresses will be converted to regular
dynamic secure MAC addresses.
Okay, let’s check it out in the CLI.
So, as always I enabled port-security first.
Then I issued SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS
STICKY, and sent a ping from PC1 to R1.
I then checked the G0/1 interface in the running-config,
and as you can see an extra command was added.
SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS STICKY,
and then PC1’s MAC address.
I didn’t configure that command, it was
added automatically when PC1’s frame entered
the interface.
So, sticky MAC addresses are basically a way
of configuring static secure MAC addresses,
without actually having to manually configure
them
Okay, before moving on to review and the quiz,
let me briefly mention the MAC address table.
Secure MAC addresses will be added to the
MAC address table like any other MAC address.
Sticky and static secure MAC addresses will
have a type of static, and regular dynamically-learned
secure MAC addresses that aren’t sticky
will have a type of dynamic.
And you can view all secure MAC addresses
in the table with SHOW MAC ADDRESS-TABLE SECURE.
I used the command, and here is PC1’s MAC
address from the previous sticky MAC address
example.
Notice the type of static, even though I didn’t
actually statically configure it myself.
It was dynamically learned.
Here’s a summary of the commands we covered
in this video.
Lots of new commands!
You’ll definitely want to experiment with
these commands in a lab.
Follow my packet tracer lab, and also try
making your own.
If you don’t remember any of these commands,
go back in the video to review.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s review
what we learned.
First I gave an intro to port security, and
explained its basic function.
Basically, it allows you to control what source
MAC addresses, and how many source MAC addresses,
are allowed to enter a switch interface.
I also briefly explained why we should use
port security.
First of all, it allows us to prevent unauthorized
devices from accessing the network.
And secondly, it helps defend against attacks
such as the DHCP exhaustion attack I showed
in a previous video, in which thousands of
spoofed MAC addresses are used to send DHCP
discover messages.
Then, while explaining various aspects of
port security, I also showed you how to configure
it.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, my recommended practice exams for the
CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Examine the show command output below.
How many secure MAC addresses were dynamically
learned on the interface?
Pause the video now to examine the output
and select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, 3.
So, according to the output 4 total MAC addresses
have been learned on the interface.
1 was configured, that’s not dynamic.
There are 3 sticky MAC addresses, what about
them?
Although sticky MAC addresses are inserted
into the running config like a static MAC
address, and their type in the MAC address
table is STATIC, they are actually dynamically
learned.
So those 3 sticky MAC addresses were dynamically
learned, and the answer is C, 3.
Let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following occur when a port-security
violation occurs in restrict mode?
(select the two best answers) Okay, pause
the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the best answers are B, unauthorized
traffic is discarded, and E, the violation
counter is incremented.
In addition, a syslog message and SNMP trap
will be sent.
However, an SNMP Get message, as in D, will
not be sent.
GET messages are sent from the SNMP manager
to the agent, not the agent to the manager.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Examine the following output.
What will SW1 do when an unauthorized frame
arrives on G0/1?
Pause the video now to examine the output
and select the best answer.
Okay, the best answer is A, unauthorized traffic
will be dropped.
The violation mode is protect, which means
that all unauthorized frames will be dropped.
However, the interface won’t be err-disabled.
Authorized frames will still be forwarded.
No syslog or SNMP messages will be sent, and
the violation count won’t be incremented
either.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following will re-enable an interface
that was disabled by port security?
(select the two best answers).
Okay, pause the video now to select the two
best answers.
The best answers are A, SHUTDOWN and NO SHUTDOWN
on the interface, and B, ERRDISABLE RECOVERY
CAUSE PSECURE-VIOLATION in global config mode.
Either of these will work to re-enable the
interface.
C, unplugging the unauthorized device, is
incorrect because that alone will not re-enable
the interface.
Note that, you should unplug the unauthorized
device before the steps in A or B, but disconnecting
the device itself won’t re-enable the interface.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Examine the following output.
What will happen when the switchport port-security
command is issued on G0/1?
Pause the video now to examine the output
and select the correct answer.
Okay, the answer is a, the command will be
accepted.
The administrative mode of G0/1 is static
access, so port security can be enabled.
However, if it was the default administrative
mode of dynamic auto, the command would be
rejected.
Port security can be configured on access
ports or trunk ports, but they must be statically
configured with SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS or
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab, so you can get hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Samil, C Mohd, Scott, Martin,
Khoa, Christopher, Tebogo, Anand, Pavel, Abraham,
Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Suki, Kenneth,
Seamus, Brandon, Marcel, Kone, Donald, Gustavo,
Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming, Ed,
John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Yousif, Boson
Software, Devin, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, May 26th
2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.