Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will talk about DHCP snooping.
DHCP snooping is a security feature available
on Cisco switches which helps to protect against
attacks which take advantage of DHCP.
DHCP snooping is covered in exam topic 5.7,
which says that you must be able to configure
layer 2 security features including DHCP snooping,
dynamic ARP inspection, and port security.
We already covered port security, and dynamic
ARP inspection will be the next video.
But for this video, let’s focus on DHCP
snooping.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
Basically, it will be similar in structure
to the previous video on port security.
I’ll introduce what DHCP snooping is, how
it works, what attacks it prevents, and how
to configure it on Cisco switches.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
video for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA, my recommended
practice exams for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s take a look at the basics of
DHCP snooping.
DHCP snooping is a security feature of switches
that is used to filter DHCP messages received
on untrusted ports.
I’ll tell you more about untrusted ports
in a minute.
Note that DHCP snooping only filters DHCP
messages.
Any other non-DHCP messages aren’t affected.
All ports are untrusted by default.
It’s then up to you to configure which ports
will be trusted.
Usually, uplink ports are configured as trusted
ports, and downlink ports remain untrusted.
I’ll use this diagram to explain.
So, R1 is either a DHCP server or a DHCP relay
agent.
The end hosts, the PCs, will use DHCP to receive
an IP address from R1.
The downlink ports on the switches, the interfaces
pointing towards the end hosts, should be
untrusted.
The network admin doesn’t have direct control
over the end user devices.
A malicious user could initiate a DHCP-based
attack from one of their devices, so it’s
best to leave these ports in the default untrusted
state.
So, which interfaces are downlink ports?
These ones, because they point toward the
end hosts.
However the uplink ports point toward the
network infrastructure, the devices the network
admin has control over.
We can be pretty sure, for example, that R1
isn’t going to initiate some kind of DHCP-based
attack.
So, we can configure these interfaces as trusted
ports.
DHCP snooping won’t inspect any messages
on trusted ports, the switch will simply forward
them as normal.
So, which ports are uplink ports?
These ones, because they point away from the
end hosts, toward the network infrastructure.
DHCP snooping won’t inspect DHCP messages
on these ports.
Now let’s look at an example of DHCP snooping.
PC1 sends a DHCP message, for example a DISCOVER
message.
SW1 receives the message on an untrusted port,
so it inspects the message to see if it’s
okay.
It determines that the message is fine, so
it forwards it as normal.
Then SW2 receives it, again on an untrusted
interface.
It checks the message and determines that
it’s okay, so it forwards it to R1.
R1 then sends the reply, and it goes straight
back to PC1 without being inspected by SW2
or SW1.
Why don’t the switches inspect the message
from R1?
It’s because they received it on their trusted
ports, so they assume the message is okay.
No need to check it.
Now here’s another example.
This time PC2 sends a DHCP message.
SW1 receives it on an untrusted port, so it
inspects the message.
However, this time it determines that the
message is not OK, so it discards the message.
Later in this video I’ll go over exactly
how DHCP snooping determines if a message
is OK or not, so I won’t get into the details
now.
But perhaps the user of PC2 was trying to
use a DHCP exploit, so SW1 decided to drop
the message.
Okay, next let’s look at a couple examples
of DHCP-based attacks that DHCP snooping can
protect against.
First up, let’s quickly review a type of
attack you already know, the DHCP starvation,
also called DHCP exhaustion, attack.
In this attack, an attacker uses spoofed MAC
addresses to flood DHCP Discover messages.
And what’s the purpose of that?
The target server’s DHCP pool becomes full,
resulting in a denial-of-service to other
devices.
They won’t be able to get an IP address
from the server.
You already know this by now, but here’s
a review.
The attacker sends DHCP discover messages
with false source MAC addresses.
Now, something I didn’t mention before is
that DHCP actually uses a field in the DHCP
message, written as CHADDR, which stands for
Client Hardware Address, to indicate the MAC
address of the client.
Why is this field needed, when the server
could just look at the source MAC address
of the frame?
Well, in a network like this where the DHCP
server is in the local network, that would
work fine.
But if the DHCP server is in a remote network
and the DHCP messages are forwarded by a DHCP
relay agent, when the server receives the
frames from the client, the source MAC address
of the frame will not be the client’s MAC
address.
So, that’s why the client hardware address
field is used to identify the client.
Anyway, that’s just an aside.
The attacker sends countless fake DHCP Discover
messages like this.
Then, when the other devices in the network
try to get IP addresses via DHCP, the server
is not able to assign them addresses, resulting
in a denial of service to those clients.
And here’s one more example of a DHCP-based
attack.
Similar to ARP poisoning, DHCP poisoning can
be used to perform a man-in-the-middle attack.
A spurious DHCP server, that just mean an
illegitimate DHCP server, replies to clients’
DHCP Discover messages and assigns them IP
addresses.
But it makes the clients use the spurious
DHCP server’s IP address as the default
gateway.
So, in the network below the attacker is running
DHCP server software, it is the spurious DHCP
server.
R1 is the legitimate DHCP server, and also
the default gateway.
Both of these DHCP servers will respond to
clients’ Discover messages, but clients
usually accept the first Offer message they
receive.
Now, in a situation like this it’s hard
to know which Offer message will reach the
clients first, the attacker’s Offer or R1’s
Offer.
But, if the legitimate DHCP server is actually
in a remote network and R1 is just acting
as a DHCP relay agent, then it’s almost
guaranteed that the attacker’s Offer will
reach the clients first, because it’s in
the local network.
No need to forward traffic to a remote network.
So, if the clients use the attacker as their
default gateway, when sending traffic to external
networks they will send traffic to the attacker
instead of the legitimate default gateway.
The attacker can then examine and/or modify
the traffic before forwarding it to the legitimate
default gateway.
Let’s walk through that process.
PC1 sends a DHCP Discover message and it is
broadcast to all devices on the local network,
including the attacker.
So, both the attacker and R1 send Offer messages
for PC1.
However, in this case the attacker’s Offer
reaches PC1 first.
Because it arrives first, PC1 will choose
to accept it, and not R1’s Offer.
So, PC1 will send a DECLINE message to R1.
I haven’t introduced this message type yet,
but I think you can guess its purpose.
However, with the attacker it completes the
DHCP D-O-R-A process, and now PC1 has an IP
address, 172.16.1.10, and its default gateway
is the attacker, 172.16.1.2.
So, if PC1 wants to send traffic to an external
network, for example the Internet, it will
send the traffic to the attacker.
The attacker can then examine the traffic
or even modify it, before finally forwarding
it to the legitimate default gateway, which
will send it to the external destination.
Because the traffic does reach its destination,
PC1 probably won’t even notice that its
traffic is being intercepted by the attacker.
So those were two examples of DHCP-based attacks
which DHCP snooping can protect against, DHCP
starvation and DHCP poisoning.
Now let’s continue looking at DHCP snooping
itself.
Let’s review the DHCP message types you
already know, and learn about a few more.
When DHCP snooping filters messages, it differentiates
between DHCP server messages and DHCP client
messages.
DHCP server messages received on an untrusted
port will always be discarded with no further
checks.
DHCP client messages will be inspected, and
then the switch will decide to forward or
discard the frame.
So, here are messages sent by DHCP servers.
OFFER and ACK you already know, they are used
in the standard DHCP D-O-R-A exchange.
NAK is a new one, it’s the opposite of ACK
and is used to decline a DHCP client’s REQUEST
message.
And here are messages sent by DHCP clients.
You already know DISCOVER and REQUEST, again
they are used in the D-O-R-A exchange.
RELEASE you already know too, I introduced
it in the DHCP video.
But for review, it’s used to tell the server
that the client no longer needs its IP address.
And then there’s DECLINE, which I just showed
earlier.
It’s used to decline the IP address offered
by a DHCP server.
Make sure you learn which messages are sent
by DHCP servers and which are sent by DHCP
clients.
It’s an important part of understanding
DHCP snooping.
Next, I’ll give you an outline of DHCP snooping
operations.
By that I mean, how it works to filter DHCP
messages.
First of all, if a DHCP message is received
on a trusted port, forward it as normal without
inspection.
Messages received on trusted ports won’t
be dropped.
But, if a DHCP message is received on an untrusted
port, inspect it and act as follows.
First, if it’s a DHCP server message, discard
it.
DHCP servers should not be connected to untrusted
ports, their ports should be trusted.
So, any OFFER, ACK, or NAK messages that are
received on an untrusted port will simply
be discarded.
However, if the message is a DHCP client message,
DISCOVER REQUEST RELEASE or DECLINE, perform
the following checks.
So, these checks depend on what kind of message
it is.
First, for DISCOVER and REQUEST messages,
the messages in the D-O-R-A exchange, check
if the frame’s source MAC address and the
DHCP message’s client hardware address fields
match.
If they match, forward the frame.
If they don’t discard it.
This can protect against attacks when an attacker
spoofs the client hardware address field of
the DHCP message.
However it’s not perfect, because the attacker
could just spoof the frame’s source MAC
address too.
Then, for RELEASE and DECLINE messages, check
if the packet’s source IP address and the
interface receiving the message match the
entry in the DHCP snooping binding table.
If they match, forward the message.
If they don’t, discard it.
I haven’t mentioned the DHCP snooping binding
table yet.
When DHCP snooping is enabled, the switch
will create a new entry in the DHCP snooping
binding table when a client successfully leases
an IP address from a DHCP server.
Let’s take a look at that in the next slide.
So let’s go over some basic DHCP snooping
configurations.
First, on SW2 I used IP DHCP SNOOPING.
This enables DHCP snooping on the switch,
but it’s not enough.
I then used IP DHCP SNOOPING VLAN 1 to tell
SW2 to enable it on VLAN 1.
So, you need to enable DHCP snooping globally,
with IP DHCP SNOOPING, and then enable it
on each VLAN necessary, with IP DHCP SNOOPING
VLAN.
So, I enabled it for VLAN 1 because that’s
the only VLAN in this network.
Then I used NO IP DHCP SNOOPING INFORMATION
OPTION.
I’m going to explain this later, so we’ll
skip it for now.
It’s not always necessary, but depending
on the network design you might need it.
Finally, I configure the G0/0 interface as
a trusted port.
As I said before, by default all ports will
be untrusted, so you will have to manually
specify which ports to trust.
G0/0 is connected to R1, which is the DHCP
server in this network, so I trusted it.
Okay, that’s all for SW2.
Then I did the exact same configurations on
SW1.
I configured SW1’s G0/0 as trusted, because
it’s the interface pointing toward the DHCP
server, R1.
Then I checked the DHCP snooping binding table
with the command SHOW IP DHCP SNOOPING BINDING.
As you can see, PC1, PC2, and PC3 were able
to get IP addresses via DHCP.
This table logs their MAC addresses, IP addresses,
lease times, VLAN numbers, and interface IDs.
As I mentioned in the previous slide, RELEASE
and DECLINE messages will be checked to make
sure their IP address and interface ID match
the entry in the DHCP snooping table.
This prevents attackers from sending these
messages on behalf of other devices in the
network, causing the DHCP server to believe
that they don’t need their IP addresses
anymore.
Okay, next up another function of DHCP snooping,
that is rate-limiting.
DHCP snooping can limit the rate at which
DHCP messages are allowed to enter an interface.
If the rate of DHCP messages crosses the configured
limit, the interface is err-disabled.
Then, similar to port security, the interface
can be manually re-enabled with SHUTDOWN and
then NO SHUTDOWN, or automatically re-enabled
with errdisable recovery.
Here’s how to configure DHCP rate limiting.
I configured it on SW1’s G0/1, 2, and 3
with IP DHCP SNOOPING LIMIT RATE 1.
This limits DHCP messages to 1 per second.
If the interface receives more than 1 DHCP
message per second, it will be disabled.
Now, this is too low for a real network.
If you set the limit to 1 DHCP message per
second, your switch interfaces will definitely
get disabled even by legitimate DHCP exchanges.
But, I set it to 1 so I could easily make
SW1’s G0/1 become disabled.
And that’s what happened.
These log messages show that G0/1 received
more DHCP messages than it’s allowed to,
so it was err-disabled.
So, we could manually re-enable it, but let’s
look at errdisable recovery again.
Here’s how to enable errdisable recovery
for DHCP rate limiting.
ERRDISABLE RECOVERY CAUSE DHCP-RATE-LIMIT.
I then checked SHOW ERRDISABLE RECOVERY, and
notice that recovery has been enabled for
the DHCP-RATE-LIMIT cause.
Also notice at the bottom that G0/1 is waiting
for the timer to count down so it can be re-enabled.
So, what’s the purpose of rate-limiting
DHCP messages?
Well, it can be very useful to protect against
DHCP exhaustion attacks.
Remember, attackers can spoof both the frame’s
source MAC address and the DHCP message’s
client hardware address field to bypass the
DHCP snooping filtering of DISCOVER and REQUEST
messages.
But, with rate limiting we can prevent them
from exhausting the DHCP server with tons
of illegitimate DHCP DISCOVER messages.
If the attacker tries to flood the server
with DISCOVER messages, the interface will
just be disabled.
So, this is a very useful function of DHCP
Snooping.
Okay, let’s go over that command that I
said I would explain earlier, NO IP DHCP SNOOPING
INFORMATION OPTION.
First, what is the information option?
Option 82, also known as the DHCP relay agent
information option, is one of many DHCP options.
In the DHCP video of this course I mentioned
that there are various DHCP options that provide
different functionalities.
Option 82 is one of them.
Option 82 provides additional information
about which DHCP relay agent received the
client’s message, on which interface, in
which VLAN, etc.
DHCP relay agents can add Option 82 to messages
they forward to the remote DHCP server.
With DHCP snooping enabled, by default Cisco
switches will add Option 82 to DHCP messages
they receive from clients, even if the switch
isn’t acting as a DHCP relay agent.
This can cause problems.
Here’s one of them.
By default, Cisco switches will drop DHCP
messages with Option 82 that are received
on an untrusted port.
Let me demonstrate.
PC1 sends a DISCOVER message, and SW1 forwards
it to SW2, adding Option 82.
Because SW2 receives it on an untrusted port,
it drops the message.
You can see the syslog message here, indicating
that it dropped the message because it had
option 82.
So, the default settings work well if the
switch is a layer 3 switch acting as a DHCP
relay agent, but in a network like this one
it won’t work.
So, that’s why I used this command I showed
earlier, NO IP DHCP SNOOPING INFORMATION OPTION.
Let’s see what happens now.
PC1 sends a DISCOVER message, and SW1 forwards
it to SW2.
This time it doesn’t add Option 82.
But let’s assume that I haven’t used the
NO IP DHCP SNOOPING INFORMATION OPTION command
on SW2 yet.
So SW2 will add Option 82 and forward it to
R1.
This will cause R1 to drop it.
You can see R1’s log messages below.
Basically, it means that R1 dropped the message
because it had option 82, but it wasn’t
sent by a relay agent.
That’s what ‘inconsistent relay information’
in the log message means.
If a DHCP message wasn’t sent by a relay
agent, it shouldn’t have option 82.
So, I added the command to SW2 also.
This time, neither SW1 or SW2 will add option
82 to the DISCOVER message.
So, R1 trusts the message and responds as
normal.
I’m not sure if you’ll get any questions
about option 82 on the CCNA exam, but it’s
good to know about because it can cause problems
for you in your DHCP snooping labs if you
don’t know about it.
Okay, here’s a review of the new commands
we covered in this video.
If you don’t remember any of these commands,
go back in the video to review them.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s review
what we covered in this video.
I first introduced what DHCP snooping is.
It’s a security feature of switches that
allows them to filter DHCP messages.
It works by inspecting DHCP messages that
arrive on untrusted ports and then deciding
to discard or forward them.
It can also control the rate at which DHCP
messages are allowed to enter an interface.
It can prevent attacks like DHCP exhaustion
and DHCP poisoning.
We also looked at how to configure DHCP snooping
on Cisco switches.
Remember to enable it globally, enable it
per VLAN, and then configure the appropriate
interfaces as trusted.
Also keep option 82 in mind, you may need
to use NO IP DHCP SNOOPING INFORMATION OPTION
to disable it.
As always, watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, my recommended practice exams for the
CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Which of the following DHCP message types
will always be discarded if received on a
DHCP snooping untrusted interface?
(select three) Okay, pause the video now to
select the correct answers.
The answers are C, NAK.
D, OFFER.
And G, ACK.
These DHCP message types will always be discarded
if received on a DHCP snooping untrusted interface
because they are sent from DHCP servers.
DHCP servers should not be connected to untrusted
interfaces.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following is NOT stored in the
DHCP snooping binding database?
Pause the video now to select the correct
answer.
Okay, the answer is D, default gateway.
Here you can see what the DHCP snooping binding
database looks like on a switch.
The default gateway is not displayed.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following are functions of DHCP
snooping?
(select two) Pause the video now to select
the best answers.
Okay, the answers are A, limiting the rate
of DHCP messages, and C, filtering messages
on untrusted ports.
DHCP snooping won’t filter messages on trusted
ports, and it also won’t filter ALL DHCP
messages.
It will only filter those that are received
on untrusted ports.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
When DHCP snooping inspects a DHCP DISCOVER
message that arrives on an untrusted interface,
what does it check?
(select the two best answers) Pause the video
now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are A, source MAC address,
and B, client hardware address.
Source MAC address refers to the source MAC
field of the Ethernet frame, and client hardware
address is a field in the DHCP message itself.
If the two match, DHCP snooping permits the
message.
If they don’t match, the message will be
discarded.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
DHCP snooping rate-limiting is configured
on SW1’s G0/1 interface.
What happens if DHCP messages are received
on G0/1 at a rate faster than the configured
limit?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
The answer is B, the interface will be disabled.
To re-enable it, you can either SHUTDOWN and
then NO SHUTDOWN the interface, or you can
configure errdisable recovery for the dhcp-rate-limit
cause.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.