Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we’ll cover Dynamic ARP Inspection.
Dynamic ARP Inspection, also called DAI, is
covered in exam topic 5.7, which says you
must be able to configure Layer 2 security
features, including DHCP snooping, DAI, and
port security.
We covered DHCP snooping and port security
in the previous two videos, so this video
will finish up topic 5.7.
Dynamic ARP inspection is a security feature
of switches which inspects ARP messages in
a similar manner to how DHCP snooping inspects
DHCP messages.
So, this video will follow a similar structure
to the previous video.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First, what is dynamic ARP inspection?
I’ll give a brief overview, and then introduce
how it works.
I’ll show you what attacks it can be used
to prevent, and then how to configure it as
we look into more details of its operations.
Watch until the end of the video for a bonus
practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, my recommended practice exams
for the CCNA.
Before dynamic ARP inspection, let’s quickly
review ARP itself.
ARP is used to learn the MAC address of another
device with a known IP address.
For example, a PC will use ARP to learn the
MAC address of its default gateway to communicate
with external networks.
It will also use ARP to learn the MAC address
of any other device on the local network.
Typically it’s a two message exchange, consisting
of an ARP request and then a reply.
Let’s look at an example.
For example, PC1 wants to send a DNS query
to the DNS server at 8.8.8.8.
It thinks, 8.8.8.8 is outside of my local
network, so I should send the frame to my
default gateway, 192.168.1.1.
However, PC1 doesn’t know the MAC address
of 192.168.1.1, which is R1.
So, it will broadcast this ARP request message,
destined for R1’s IP address.
Every device in the LAN will receive the message,
because the destination MAC address is the
broadcast MAC address of all Fs.
Let’s look at that ARP request in wireshark.
The ARP message is encapsulated in an Ethernet
frame of course, but there is no IP header.
So, in the previous slide when I wrote ‘source
IP’ and ‘destination IP’ for the ARP
message, I’m actually referring to these
fields in the ARP message itself.
Specifically the sender IP address, which
is the source IP address, and the target IP
address, which is the destination IP address.
ARP messages are only broadcast within the
local network, not sent by routers to external
networks, so there’s no need to encapsulate
the ARP message in an IP header.
Keep these fields in mind, sender MAC and
IP address, as well as target MAC and IP address,
they can play a role in the dynamic ARP inspection
process.
Because its IP address was in the ARP message’s
target IP address field, R1 will then send
an ARP reply to PC1 so that PC1 can learn
R1’s MAC address and add an entry for R1
in its ARP table.
Note that R1 also added an entry for PC1 in
its own ARP table when it received the original
ARP request from PC1, so R1 doesn’t need
to send an ARP request if it wants to send
a frame to PC1.
Here’s that ARP reply in Wireshark.
The sender IP and MAC fields are R1’s addresses,
and the destination IP and MAC fields are
PC1’s addresses.
Pause the video if you want to check out the
message.
So, PC1 is now able to insert R1’s MAC address
as the destination MAC of its DNS query, and
then send the message to R1 which will forward
it over the Internet.
So, that’s the basic ARP process.
But there is also something called gratuitous
ARP, which I introduced briefly in another
video.
A gratuitous ARP message is an ARP reply that
is sent without receiving an ARP request.
It is sent to the broadcast MAC address, all
Fs.
Note that standard ARP replies are not broadcast.
They are unicast messages sent to the device
that sent the ARP request.
Gratuitous ARP allows other devices on the
local network to learn the MAC address of
the device that sent the gratuitous ARP, and
they don’t have to send ARP requests.
This depends on the device maker, but some
devices automatically send gratuitous ARP
messages when an interface is enabled, IP
address is changed, MAC address is changed,
etc.
So, for example if PC2’s network interface
is enabled it might send this gratuitous ARP
reply, and it is flooded in the local network.
Now the other devices will add an ARP entry
for PC2 in their ARP tables, and the switches
also add entries for PC2 in their MAC address
tables.
We’ll come back to the concept of gratuitous
ARP when we cover an attack involving it,
but now let’s move on.
Okay, let’s move on to Dynamic ARP Inspection.
DAI is a feature of switches that is used
to filter ARP messages received on untrusted
ports.
It only filters ARP messages.
All other messages will be unaffected.
Just like DHCP snooping, all ports are untrusted
by default.
Typically, all ports connected to other network
devices, for example switches or routers,
should be configured as trusted, while interfaces
connected to end hosts should remain untrusted.
So, in this network that means we should configure
these interfaces as trusted, but leave these
interfaces as untrusted.
Now, SW2’s interface connected to SW1 could
also be left as untrusted because it is a
downlink leading toward the end hosts.
Either design will work.
In Cisco’s documentation they recommend
that all interfaces connected to switches,
routers, etc. are configured as trusted, so
that’s why I made the interface trusted.
Here’s how DAI works, and you’ll see it’s
basically the same as DHCP snooping.
PC1 sends an ARP request.
Because it arrives on an untrusted port, SW1
uses DAI to inspect it.
It determines the message is OK, so it forwards
it to SW2.
In this case SW2 doesn’t inspect it, because
it receives the message on a trusted interface,
so it forwards it to R1, which sends the reply.
This message isn’t inspected by SW2 or SW1,
because they receive it on trusted interfaces.
This time PC2 sends an ARP message, but SW1
inspects it and decides to discard the message
because it violates the rules of DAI.
I’ll explain exactly how DAI determines
if a message is okay or not later, but now
let me show you an ARP-based attack.
So, this is the ARP poisoning attack, which
I briefly mentioned in a previous video.
Similar to DHCP poisoning, ARP poisoning involves
an attacker manipulating targets’ ARP tables
so traffic is sent to the attacker.
To do this, the attacker can send gratuitous
ARP messages using another device’s IP address.
Another option is to send replies to the targets’
legitimate ARP request messages, but I’ll
use gratuitous ARP for this demonstration.
Other devices will receive the gratuitous
ARP and update their ARP tables, causing them
to send traffic to the attacker instead of
the legitimate destination.
For example, the attacker PC2 sends a GARP
message using the IP address of the default
gateway, R1.
It is flooded through the network, and all
devices receive it.
So, they update their ARP tables to map PC2’s
MAC address to the IP address 192.168.1.1.
By the way, R1 doesn’t update its ARP table,
because 192.168.1.1 is its own IP address.
Now, if PC1 wants to send this packet to an
external network, it is sent to PC2 first.
PC2 can save a copy of the message for future
inspection and then forward it to the legitimate
default gateway, R1.
It’s possible that PC2 could also manipulate
the information in the packet.
So, this is how ARP can be used to perform
a man in the middle attack, similar to the
DHCP poisoning attack shown in the previous
video.
Now let’s see how DAI can protect against
this kind of attack.
First, here’s a summary of how DAI works.
DAI inspects the sender MAC and sender IP
fields of ARP messages received on untrusted
ports and checks if there is a matching entry
in the DHCP snooping binding table.
So, I showed you in the previous video that
DHCP snooping creates a binding table, and
as you can see the MAC addresses and IP addresses
of DHCP clients are entered here.
So, DAI checks ARP messages and if there is
a matching entry in the DHCP snooping table,
the ARP message is forwarded normally.
DAI trusts the message.
However, if there isn’t a matching entry
in the DHCP snooping binding table the ARP
message is discarded.
Note that this check only occurs on untrusted
ports, DAI doesn’t inspect messages received
on trusted ports.
They are forwarded as normal.
However, just like in DHCP snooping all ports
are untrusted by default, so you have to manually
specify which ports are trusted.
So, DAI operations are usually reliant on
DHCP snooping, but actually there is another
option.
ARP ACLs can be manually configured to map
IP addresses and MAC addresses for DAI to
check.
This can be useful for hosts that don’t
use DHCP.
If they don’t use DHCP, they won’t have
an entry in the DHCP snooping table, so DAI
will just drop all ARP messages they try to
send.
You can configure ARP ACLs for these specific
hosts.
Or all hosts if you want, but that’s a lot
of manual work.
I’ll show you how to configure ARP ACLs
later.
In addition to the sender MAC and sender IP
fields, DAI can be configured to perform more
in-depth checks, but these are optional.
I’ll briefly introduce them later.
And like DHCP snooping, DAI also supports
rate-limiting to prevent attackers from overwhelming
the switch with ARP messages.
I didn’t mention this in the last video,
but DHCP snooping and DAI both require work
from the switch’s CPU.
So, even if the attacker’s messages are
blocked they can still overload the switch
CPU by sending a ton of ARP messages.
If the attacker tries to do that, rate limiting
will just disable the interface, so it’s
a useful mitigation technique.
Now let’s move on to DAI configuration.
First up, the basic commands to enable it
and configure trusted ports.
First, use IP ARP INSPECTION VLAN, followed
by the VLAN number, to enable DAI on a VLAN.
In this network I’m using VLAN 1 only.
However, if there are multiple VLANs, you
should enable DAI for each VLAN.
If you don’t, only ARP messages in the specified
VLAN, VLAN 1 in this case, will be inspected.
Then I configured SW2’s G0/0 and G0/1 interfaces
as trusted ports with the command IP ARP INSPECTION
TRUST.
And that’s it, those are the basic commands
to enable DAI and configure trusted ports.
Then I did the same configurations on SW1,
but only made its G0/0 interface trusted.
Now, you might have noticed a difference between
DHCP snooping configuration and DAI configuration.
DHCP requires two commands to enable it, IP
DHCP SNOOPING and IP DHCP SNOOPING VLAN.
So, enable it globally and then enable it
per VLAN.
DAI is different, you only have to enable
it per VLAN with the command IP ARP INSPECTION
VLAN.
Honestly I’m not sure the reason for this
difference, but that’s how it works.
Okay let’s check out one of the DAI show
commands, SHOW IP ARP INSPECTION INTERFACES.
First, you can see the trust state of each
interface.
On SW1 only G0/0 is trusted, as I configured.
This column shows us the DAI rate limiting
settings.
There are a few differences between DHCP snooping
rate limiting and DAI rate limiting.
DAI rate limiting is enabled on untrusted
ports by default with a rate of 15 packets
per second, but it is disabled on trusted
ports by default.
In the case of DHCP snooping, rate limiting
is disabled on all interfaces, trusted and
untrusted, by default.
And this column shows us one more difference.
DHCP snooping rate limiting is configured
like this.
X packets per second.
However DAI has a feature called the burst
interval which allows you to configure rate
limiting like X packets per Y seconds.
So, the interval being measured doesn’t
have to be one second, which provides more
flexibility with how you can control the rate
of ARP messages on the interface.
Okay, since I just brought up DAI rate limiting
let’s see how to configure it.
Let’s configure DAI rate limiting on SW1.
First, on G0/1 and 2 I used IP ARP INSPECTION
LIMIT RATE 25, that means 25 packets, and
then BURST INTERVAL 2, that means 2 seconds.
So, I changed the rate from 15 packets per
second to 25 packets per 2 seconds.
Note that the burst interval is optional.
If you don’t specify it, the default is
1 second.
To demonstrate, on G0/3 I configured IP ARP
INSPECTION LIMIT RATE 10, without specifying
the burst interval.
And here you can see the results.
For G0/1 and 2 it’s 25 packets per 2 seconds,
and for G0/3 it’s 10 packets per second.
So, that’s how DAI rate limiting is configured.
If ARP messages are received faster than the
specified rate, the interface will be err-disabled.
Let me emphasize that, rate limiting limits
the rate that ARP messages are received on
an interface, not sent by an interface.
Anyway, interfaces disabled by ARP inspection
can be re-enabled manually with SHUTDOWN and
NO SHUTDOWN on the interface, or with err-disable
recovery.
The command is ERRDISABLE RECOVERY CAUSE ARP-INSPECTION.
I configured err-disable recovery on SW1,
and as you can see it is enabled when I check
with SHOW ERRDISABLE RECOVERY.
Okay, that’s all for DAI rate limiting.
Now let me introduce those additional checks
I mentioned before.
By default, DAI checks the sender MAC and
IP addresses, to see if there is a matching
entry in the DHCP snooping binding table or
not.
However, additional checks can be performed
by configuring the IP ARP INSPECTION VALIDATE
command.
The three options are destination MAC, IP,
and source MAC.
How exactly do these work?
I think Cisco’s explanations are quite straightforward
and easy to understand, so I’ll just paste
them here.
Destination MAC validates ARP responses by
checking the destination MAC address in the
Ethernet header against the target MAC address
in the ARP message.
If they are different, the frame is dropped.
IP validation looks for invalid or unexpected
IP addresses which shouldn’t be found in
ARP messages, such as 0.0.0.0, 255.255.255.255,
and multicast IP addresses.
These IP addresses shouldn’t belong to a
host, so they are considered invalid.
The sender IP address is checked in both ARP
request and reply messages, but the target
IP address is checked only in ARP replies.
Finally, source MAC validation checks the
source MAC of the Ethernet header and compares
it to the sender MAC in the ARP message.
If they don’t match, the message is considered
invalid and is dropped.
To clarify those, here is that ARP reply message
I showed earlier.
These validation checks look at the source
and destination MAC addresses in the Ethernet
header, and also at these fields in the ARP
message itself.
In this case, the source and destination in
the Ethernet header match the sender and target
MAC addresses in the ARP message, so the message
is valid for the destination MAC and source
MAC checks.
The sender and target IP addresses in the
ARP message are also valid, so it passes that
check too.
Note that these checks are done in addition
to the standard DAI check, which looks at
the sender MAC and IP addresses and compares
them to the DHCP snooping binding table.
So, if these checks are configured an ARP
message must pass all of the checks to be
considered valid.
There’s an important point to mention about
configuring those additional checks.
I configured, in order, IP ARP INSPECTION
VALIDATE DST-MAC, then IP, then SRC-MAC, and
checked with SHOW RUN | INCLUDE VALIDATE.
So, what do you think was displayed?
Only VALIDATE SRC-MAC was displayed.
First I configured VALIDATE DST-MAC, but when
I configured VALIDATE IP, it overwrote the
previous command.
Then when I configured VALIDATE SRC-MAC, it
overwrote IP.
So, if you want to enable all three checks,
you should configure it like this.
IP ARP INSPECTION VALIDATE IP SRC-MAC DST-MAC.
I checked again, and now you can see all three.
To summarize, you must enter all of the validation
checks you want in a single command.
You can specify one, two, or all three, and
the order isn’t significant, it doesn’t
matter.
Okay, those are the optional validation checks
that can be configured.
Now there is one more topic I want to cover,
ARP ACLs.
Now, I’m pretty sure the topic of ARP ACLs
and their configuration is beyond the scope
of the CCNA exam.
So, I will just give a quick example of how
they work and then we’ll finish up the video.
I won’t go into the details here.
Here is SW2’s DHCP snooping binding table.
SRV1 has a static IP address, 192.168.1.100,
so it doesn’t have an entry in SW2’s DHCP
snooping binding table.
So, what will happen when SRV1 tries to send
an ARP request?
It will be dropped, with an error message
like this.
It says 1 invalid ARP request on G0/2 in VLAN1.
That’s because SRV1 doesn’t have an entry
in SW2’s DHCP snooping binding table.
So, to fix this let’s configure an ARP ACL
to permit SRV1.
Here’s the configuration.
ARP ACCESS-LIST, followed by a name, to create
the ARP ACL.
Then I configured PERMIT IP HOST 192.168.1.100
MAC HOST, followed by SRV1’s MAC address.
But, creating the ARP ACL alone doesn’t
help, we have to apply it for it to take effect.
The command is IP ARP INSPECTION FILTER, the
ACL name, VLAN, and the VLAN number.
Okay, we created the ARP ACL and then applied
it.
This time when SRV1 tries to send an ARP request,
SW2 forwards it even though there is no entry
in the DHCP snooping binding table.
That’s because of the ARP ACL we configured.
Here’s one last show command before we finish,
SHOW IP ARP INSPECTION.
It gives a summary of the DAI configuration
as well as statistics about how many ARP messages
have been forwarded and dropped.
Let me just point out a few fields, you don’t
have to know all of them.
First, notice that source MAC, destination
MAC, and IP address validation are enabled.
I enabled them on SW1 before, but I enabled
them on SW2 also.
Here we can see that DAI is configured and
operational in VLAN1, and the ACL ARP-ACL-1
is in effect.
Now, this is a detail beyond the scope of
the CCNA, but notice the static ACL field
at the end.
If static ACL is set to yes, the implicit
deny at the end of the ARP ACL will take effect.
Like regular IP ACLs, ARP ACLs also have an
implicit deny.
But if you don’t enable the static setting,
the implicit deny will be ignored.
I didn’t configure it as a static ACL, so
in my example the implicit deny is ignored.
But what will happen if the implicit deny
takes effect?
It will cause all ARP messages not permitted
by the ARP ACL to be denied.
So, in effect this means that only the ARP
ACL will be checked.
The DHCP snooping table will not be checked.
Usually we leave this setting as No, and as
I said it’s just an interesting detail that’s
beyond the scope of the CCNA, so let’s keep
going.
Here you can see some statistics about how
many ARP messages have been forwarded and
dropped.
Notice 4 messages have been dropped, and all
4 are DHCP drops.
That means messages dropped because there
wasn’t a matching entry in the DHCP snooping
table.
That’s because I tried to ping from SRV1
before configuring the ARP ACL.
However, here you can see 1 ACL permit.
This is when SW2 permitted SRV1’s ARP message
after I configured the ARP ACL.
SRV1’s ARP request message was permitted
and counted here.
Here is a summary of the new commands we looked
at in this video.
As always, go back in the video to review
if you don’t remember any of these commands.
Also make sure to practice these commands
in a lab, for example my packet tracer lab
in the next video.
Hands-on practice is an essential part of
studying for the CCNA.
Before moving on to the quiz, here’s a quick
review of what we covered.
I introduced what Dynamic ARP Inspection is.
It’s a switch security feature similar to
DHCP snooping that inspects ARP messages and
then decides to forward or drop the message.
I introduced how it works and what attacks
it prevents, primarily ARP poisoning which
can be used to perform a man-in-the-middle
attack.
I also showed you how to configure DAI, while
covering various details about its operations.
Honestly, in this video I probably gave you
more information about DAI than you need to
know for the CCNA, but I’d rather give you
more information than not enough.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, my recommended practice exams
for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
You issue the IP ARP INSPECTION VLAN 1 command
on SW1.
Which of the following statements is true
about SW1 after issuing the command?
Pause the video now to select the correct
answer.
The answer is A, all interfaces in VLAN 1
are untrusted.
Just like in DHCP snooping, when DAI is first
enabled all interfaces will be in an untrusted
state by default.
So, to trust specific ports you’ll have
to configure them manually.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
The following commands are configured on SW1.
Which of the following statements is true
after the commands have been issued?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, DAI validation is only
enabled for destination MAC addresses.
When configuring these optional DAI validation
checks, to configure multiple checks you should
configure them all in a single command.
Otherwise, only the last command entered will
take effect.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following are true about DAI
rate limiting?
(select two).
Okay, pause the video now to select the two
correct answers.
Okay, the answers are B, it is enabled on
untrusted ports by default, and D, it is enabled
at a rate of 15 packets per second by default.
Unlike DHCP snooping rate limiting, for DAI
rate limiting is enabled at a rate of 15 packets
per second on all untrusted ports by default.
Another difference between DHCP snooping and
DAI is that DAI allows you to configure a
burst interval, so the rate limit can be calculated
like 50 packets over three seconds, for example.
DHCP snooping only allows you to configure
the packet rate per 1 second.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
DAI inspects the sender IP and MAC addresses
to determine whether an ARP packet should
be forwarded or dropped.
Which of the following does it check the sender
IP and MAC against?
(select two).
Pause the video now to select the two correct
answers.
Okay, the answers are B, DHCP snooping binding
table, and D, ARP ACLs.
When DHCP snooping is enabled, the DHCP snooping
binding table is automatically built as hosts
lease IP addresses from DHCP servers.
So, DAI uses that table to check ARP messages.
However, for hosts that don’t use DHCP,
ARP ACLs can be manually configured to permit
their ARP messages.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following commands limit ARP
messages to a maximum average of 15 per second?
(select two).
Pause the video now to select the correct
answers.
Okay, the answers are A, IP ARP INSPECTION
LIMIT RATE 15 and C, IP ARP INSPECTION LIMIT
RATE 45 BURST INTERVAL 3.
Both of them will limit ARP messages received
on the interface to an average of 15 per second.
However, 45 packets over three seconds allows
for short bursts of a higher rate, for example
30 packets in 1 second, 10 packets the next
second, and then 0 packets the second after
that.
However the 15 packets over 1 second setting
monitors each second and strictly makes sure
the rate never goes over 15.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.