Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we’ll look at LAN architectures.
By architectures, I mean how devices like
routers, switches, PCs, servers, etc are connected
together to make networks.
These LAN architectures are exam topics 1.2.a,
b, c, and e. 2 tier, 3 tier, spine-leaf, and
small office/home office.
The other topics in 1.2, 1.2.d which is WAN
and 1.2.f which is on-premises and cloud,
will be covered in separate videos.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
Actually, it’s exactly the exam topics I
just pointed out.
First we’ll cover 2-tier and 3-tier LAN
architectures.
These are common traditional LAN designs used
in enterprise networks.
Then we’ll cover spine-leaf architecture,
which is a design common in data center environments.
Finally I’ll briefly cover SOHO, Small Office/Home
Office networks.
Small networks like this are different than
the others in that they typically have a single
network device acting as router, switch, firewall,
and wireless access point.
Watch until the end of the video for a bonus
practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, my recommended practice exams
for the CCNA.
Before actually getting into the topics for
this video, let me introduce why this section
of the course is important.
You have studied various network technologies
up to this point in the course, such as routing
and switching, STP, EtherChannel, OSPF, FHRPs,
switch security features, etc.
So, now let’s look at some basic concepts
of network design and architecture.
Network design is a very deep topic and to
be a good network designer, a good network
architect, requires a deep understanding of
general principals as well as the needs of
the specific customer.
Although there are standard best practices
for network design, there are very few universal
correct answers.
The answer to most general questions about
network design is ‘it depends’, because
the requirements of each network are different.
Now, in the early stages of your networking
career you probably won’t be asked to design
networks yourself.
That’s usually left for the more experienced
engineers.
However, to understand the networks you will
be configuring and troubleshooting it’s
important to know some basics of network design
and architecture.
So, in this video and the next few we’ll
cover some basic concepts.
And now, before introducing the two-tier and
three-tier LAN designs which are the main
topics of this video, I want to briefly introduce
a few common terminologies you might hear
and which I might use throughout this video.
These are general terms, not only for LAN
design but for connections between devices
in general.
The first one is called a ‘star’ topology.
When several devices all connect to one central
device we can draw them in a star shape like
below, so this is often called a star topology.
In the diagram below, all PCs connect to one
central switch, and I have placed them in
a star shape around the switch.
Note that in network diagrams the devices
might not be drawn like this, in the shape
of a star.
But if many devices are all connected to one
central device, we can call it a star topology
regardless of how the diagram is drawn.
The next term is full mesh, which is when
each device is connected to each other device,
forming a mesh.
Here’s an example.
6 routers, and each router is connected to
each other router.
This is called a full mesh topology.
The last one I want to introduce is partial
mesh, which is when some devices are connected
to each other, but not all.
Here’s an example with four switches.
Notice that the top two switches are both
connected to each other switch, but the bottom
two switches are not directly connected.
This is a partial mesh topology.
Okay, those are the three general terms I
wanted to introduce.
You’ll see examples of them throughout this
video and the next video, so make sure to
remember them.
Now let’s get into the basics of campus
LAN design.
By campus LAN, I mean a LAN of devices in
a building, or perhaps multiple buildings,
that are close to each other.
Remember, LAN stands for Local Area Network.
First we’ll look at the two-tier LAN design,
which consists of two hierarchical layers:
the access layer and the distribution layer.
The two tier design is also called a ‘collapsed
core’ design because it omits a layer that
is found in the three tier design, the core
layer.
Or more accurately, it combines the two together
into one layer.
So, in the next slide I’ll show you an example
of a two-tier design but first let me summarize
each layer.
First, the access layer.
This is the layer that end hosts connect to,
for example PCs, printers, security cameras,
etc.
They will usually connect to an access layer
switch.
So, typically access layer switches have lots
of ports for end hosts to connect to.
QoS marking is typically done here.
This is the layer that end hosts connect to,
so we usually mark traffic here because it’s
a good practice to mark traffic as early as
possible in the network.
Security services like port security, DAI,
etc are typically performed here, too.
Also, switchports might be PoE, Power over
Ethernet-enabled if there are wireless access
points or IP phones in the LAN.
So that’s the access layer, the switches
that end hosts connect to.
Then there is the distribution layer.
These switches aggregate connections from
the access layer switches.
So, depending on how many end hosts there
are your network might have many access layer
switches.
Those connections are then usually aggregated
to a redundant pair of two distribution layer
switches, as you’ll see in the next slide.
Typically, this is the border between Layer
2 and Layer 3 in the network.
So, the distribution layer switches run both
Layer 3 protocols such as OSPF and Layer 2
protocols such as spanning tree.
This is not always the case, but usually the
connections from the access layer switches
to the distribution layer switches are Layer
2 connections, and then end hosts use the
SVIs on the distribution layer switches as
their default gateways.
The distribution layer is used to connect
to services such as Internet, WAN, etc.
Okay, let’s look at an example.
Here’s a simple two-tier campus LAN network.
The two access-layer switches, A1 and A2,
each have some different end hosts connected,
and each also has a wireless access point
connected too.
D1 and D2 are the distribution layer switches,
and each is connected to both A1 and A2.
This provides redundancy, by having extra
connections in case one fails.
However, the connections between the access
layer and distribution layer are Layer 2,
and that means loops can occur.
So, spanning-tree protocol disables a few
links to prevent loops.
Now, D1 and D2 are multilayer switches, and
the end hosts use the SVIs on D1 and D2 as
their default gateways.
So, they will probably be using a first hop
redundancy protocol such as HSRP or VRRP to
provide a redundant virtual IP address for
hosts to use as their default gateway.
As I said before, the distribution layer is
used to connect to services such as the Internet
or the WAN, as well as other parts of the
LAN.
So, here’s the connection to the Internet,
two redundant connections to two different
Internet Service Providers.
And perhaps there’s another set of distribution
and access switches over here, with lots of
servers connected to the access layer switches.
Notice that each distribution layer switch
is connected to each other distribution layer
switch.
By the way, in a collapsed core two-tier design
like this, the distribution layer is sometimes
called the core-distribution layer, because
it has to fulfill the purpose of both layers.
We’ll see the core layer later.
These connections between distribution switches
are Layer 3, no spanning-tree running here.
Routing information can be shared via OSPF,
for example.
So, this is an example of a two-tier network
architecture.
The end hosts connect to the access layer
which performs things like QoS marking, security
features like DAI, etc.
The distribution layer switches aggregate
those connections and then connect further
to services like the Internet and to other
parts of the LAN.
Now let me relate this back to those common
terminologies I mentioned at the beginning.
Although I haven’t drawn the diagram like
a star, at the access layer we have many devices
all connecting to one central device, each
access switch.
So, these are four small star topologies.
If I put more end hosts on the diagram and
arranged them around each access switch, it
would look more like a star, but I think you
get the point.
And here we have a couple partial mesh topologies
between the access layers and the distribution
layers.
Notice that the distribution switches are
connected to each other and to each access
switch, but the access switches aren’t directly
connected.
So, these are two partial meshes.
And finally, between the four distribution
layer switches we have a full mesh.
Each distribution switch is connected to each
other distribution switch, forming a full
mesh.
You’ll see elements of full-mesh, partial-mesh,
and star topologies in all kinds of network
designs, and often combinations of them sometimes
called a hybrid topology, so once again make
sure you remember these terms.
Now, if the network gets larger we might have
many distribution layers connecting to different
parts of the LAN.
Do you see anything wrong with this?
In large LAN networks with many distribution
layer switches, for example in separate buildings
across a campus, the number of connections
required between distribution layer switches
grows rapidly.
This makes it much more difficult and complicated
to scale the network, to make it bigger.
So, to help scale large LAN networks you can
add a Core Layer.
By the way, Cisco recommends adding a Core
Layer if there are more than three distribution
layers in a single location.
In this case there are 6, so we should add
a core layer.
Here’s how it looks with a core layer added.
Each distribution layer connects to the core
layer, no need for a full mesh of direct connections
between the distribution layer switches.
These core layer switches are a pair of very
powerful and fast switches.
So let’s take a look at how the core layer
works now.
When we add a Core Layer we now have a three-tier
LAN design, access, distribution, and core.
Let’s talk about that core layer.
It connections separate distribution layers
together in large LAN networks.
The focus of this layer is speed, you might
hear the term ‘fast transport’ as being
a goal of the core layer.
CPU-intensive operations such as security
features, QoS marking and classification,
etc should be avoided at this Layer.
We just want fast forwarding of packets, nothing
extra.
And the connections are all Layer 3.
We definitely don’t want spanning tree at
the Core Layer.
The core layer should maintain connectivity
throughout the LAN even if devices fail.
Because it’s the backbone of the LAN, redundancy
of devices and connections is very important.
Let’s take a look at the previous topology
with an added core layer.
Here’s how the network might look with the
addition of a core layer.
This time, the core switches connect to the
Internet routers.
And if we have additional distribution and
access layers, where will they connect?
As you know, they will also connect to the
core switches.
So, this is an example of a three-tier campus
LAN.
For smaller LANs two tiers is sufficient,
but larger LANs will likely have three tiers
like this.
Okay, let’s review those tiers once more
and then move on.
Here are those attributes of each Layer again.
For the access layer, remember that it is
the layer that end hosts connect to and it
often performs services like QoS marking,
port security, DAI, DHCP snooping, etc.
For the distribution layer, remember that
it is all about aggregating connections from
the access layer and serves as the border
between the Layer 2 network and the Layer
3 network.
In a two-tier design it connects to services
such as the Internet and WAN, although in
a three-tier network usually those connections
will be to the core layer instead.
Notice I added an extra note saying that it
is sometimes called the aggregation layer.
Remember that, as aggregation of connections
is an essential function of this layer.
Finally, the core layer is used in large LANs
to connect distribution layers together, and
the focus is on speed, so we avoid operations
like security and QoS marking and classification.
All connections here are Layer 3.
Okay, that’s all for the two- and three-tier
campus LAN designs.
Keep in mind what I said earlier, there are
very few universal correct answers in network
design.
Although these two- and three-tier LAN designs
are common practice and recommended by Cisco,
in the real world there are countless variations
depending on the needs of the enterprise.
Let’s move on to the topic of Spine-Leaf
architecture.
This photo I’m showing you was taken in
a data center, and the reason why I’m showing
you it is because spine-leaf architecture
was designed for data centers.
Currently I work for a large data center provider,
so I spend a lot of time in environments like
this.
So, what exactly is a data center?
Data centers are dedicated spaces or buildings
used to store computer systems such as servers
and network devices.
They typically contain halls of racks, like
the previous photo, and the servers and network
devices are mounted onto the racks.
Traditional data center designs used a three-tier
architecture, access, distribution, and core,
like we just covered.
This traditional design worked well when most
of the traffic in the data center was north-south.
What does that mean?
Well, if we look at this diagram, north-south
refers to traffic from access layer up to
distribution, core, and then perhaps out to
the Internet or back down south to the other
distribution and access layers.
These other sections of the LAN are drawn
off to the side so the traffic doesn’t look
north-south when drawing the arrows in this
diagram, but this is north-south traffic too,
of course.
This is in contrast to east-west traffic,
which is for example traffic between these
servers in the same part of the network like
this, the traffic doesn’t go out to other
parts of the LAN or out to the Internet.
With the precedence of virtual servers, which
is a topic I’ll cover soon in the course
by the way, applications are often deployed
in a distributed manner, across multiple physical
servers, which increases the amount of East-West
traffic in the data center.
If you’re not sure what a virtual server
is or you don’t know what virtualization
is, like I said I’ll cover it soon in another
video.
Anyway, the point is that with this increase
in east-west traffic, the traditional three-tier
architecture led to bottlenecks in bandwidth
as well as variability in the server-to-server
latency depending on the path the traffic
takes.
To solve this, spine-leaf architecture, also
called Clos architecture after the name of
one of the designers, has become prominent
in data centers.
Let’s check it out.
Here’s what spine-leaf architecture looks
like.
It’s two-tier, but different than the traditional
two-tier design we looked at before.
There are spine switches and leaf switches,
and here are the basic rules about spine-leaf
architecture.
Every leaf switch is connected to every spine
switch.
If you look at the diagram below, there are
three spine switches, and each leaf switch
has three uplinks, one to each spine switch.
Therefore, every spine switch is connected
to every leaf switch too.
However, leaf switches do not connect to other
leaf switches, and spine switches do not connect
to other spine switches.
Finally, end hosts, for example servers, only
connect to leaf switches.
They are like the ‘access layer’ of the
spine-leaf architecture.
Okay, those are the main rules of spine-leaf
architecture.
The path taken by traffic is randomly chosen
to balance the traffic load among the spine
switches.
And each server is separated by the same number
of ‘hops’, except those connected to the
same leaf switch which have fewer hops of
course, and this provides consistent latency
for east-west traffic, traffic between the
servers.
For example, for this server on the left to
reach this other server the traffic passes
through three switches.
And then to reach this other server it once
again has to pass through three switches.
So, that’s spine-leaf architecture.
It’s also very simple to scale, because
if you need to add more servers you can just
add another leaf switch and connect it to
the existing spine switches.
As with all topics in the CCNA, there is a
lot more depth to spine-leaf architecture
than what I just mentioned, but make sure
you know these basic characteristics of Spine-Leaf
for the CCNA exam, and you should be set.
Now let’s move on to the final topic.
That final topic is SOHO networks.
Small Office/Home Office, also called SOHO
refers to the office of a small company, or
a small home office with few devices.
Now, it doesn’t actually have to be used
as an office.
If your home has a network connected to the
Internet it is considered a SOHO network.
SOHO networks don’t have complex needs,
so all networking functions are typically
provided by a single device which is often
called a home router or wireless router.
There is no need for a dedicated device for
each function.
This one device can serve as a router, connecting
the home network to the Internet.
Also a switch, as there are usually a few
switchports on the back to connect other devices
to.
Also there are usually simple firewall functions,
typically configured to block all connections
coming from the outside network, but to allow
connections to the Internet from internal
devices.
It also serves as a wireless access point,
allowing you to connect your laptop or phone,
for example, to the network using WiFi.
Also in some cases it can serve as a modem
too for cable internet, although sometimes
the modem is a separate device.
Here’s an example of a simple home router,
although they come in all shapes and sizes.
For very small networks, there’s no need
to have a separate device dedicated to routing,
a device dedicated to switching, a device
dedicated to providing wireless access, etc.
This one device can do it all.
So, although an enterprise network would have
these all as separate devices, the home router
combines them all into one small device.
Now, throughout this course we are focusing
on enterprise networking.
Very small companies or home offices don’t
have the need, or probably the resources,
to hire a dedicated network engineer.
So, they often just rent a wireless router
from the ISP and that serves their purposes.
Here’s a review of what we covered in this
video.
First, traditional 2-tier and 3-tier LAN architecture.
Make sure you know the three layers, access
distribution and core, and their basic characteristics.
Then I introduced spine-leaf architecture,
which is common in modern data center environments.
Again, make sure you know the basic rules
of spine-leaf and its characteristics.
Finally we took a brief look at SOHO, Small
Office/Home Office, networks.
They are small networks that typically have
a single networking device that provides them
with routing, switching, security, and wireless
access.
As always, watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, my recommended practice exams
for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which Layer typically serves as the boundary
between Layer 2 and Layer 3 in a traditional
2-tier or 3-tier network?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
The answer is B, distribution.
Typically, the connections from access layer
to distribution layer are Layer 2 and they
run spanning tree protocol.
The connections from distribution to core
are Layer 3.
So, the distribution layer serves as the boundary
between Layer 2 and Layer 3.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following would you NOT expect
to find in the Core Layer of a traditional
3-tier LAN?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, STP, spanning tree
protocol.
Because the connections at the Core Layer
are all Layer 3, spanning tree protocol should
not be running in the core layer.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
At which layer would you expect to find PoE-enabled
switchports in a traditional 3-tier LAN?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, Access.
Devices that use PoE like wireless access
points, IP phones, and IP security cameras
all connect to the access layer, so that’s
where PoE-enabled ports can often be found.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
In a Spine-Leaf architecture, which of the
following should not be connected to a Leaf
switch?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
The answer is B, a leaf switch.
Endpoints like servers can connect to leaf
switches, and each leaf switch should connect
to all spine switches, but leaf switches should
not connect to each other.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following functions might be
included in the device known as a wireless
router?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is F. A wireless router,
also known as a home router, is a multipurpose
network device that can provide routing, switching,
wireless access, security features, etc for
a small network.
This kind of device is often used in SOHO,
Small Office/Home Office, networks.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
There are supplementary materials for this
video.
There is a flashcard deck to use with the
software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab, so you can get hands-on practice.
In this case, although we didn’t cover any
configurations in this video I will take the
opportunity to demonstrate an important concept
for LANs regarding the interaction between
spanning tree protocol and FHRPs such as HSRP.
That will be in the next video.
To get the free flashcards and lab files for
the course, sign up at the link in the video
description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Khoa, Dragos, Tanvir, Charlesetta,
Gerrard, Tom, Samil, Scott, Martin, Tebogo,
Anand, Pavel, Abraham, Serge, Njoku, Viktor,
Suki, Kenneth, Seamus, Brandon, Marcel, Kone,
Donald, Gustavo, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison,
Marko, Ed, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Boson
Software, Devin, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, July 3rd
2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.