Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we’ll look at WAN architectures.
Specifically, we’ll be covering topic 1.2.d,
WAN, and topic 5.5, describe remote access
and site-to-site VPNs.
Both of these exam topics use the term ‘describe’,
so we won’t be looking at any actual configurations.
You just need a basic understanding of some
common WAN technologies and how they operate.
Note that we’ll be looking at WANs from
the perspective of an enterprise which is
the customer of a service provider, not from
the perspective of the service provider itself.
To learn more about the service provider perspective,
consider the CCNP service provider certification
in the future.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll give an introduction to WANs
and explain what they are.
Then I’ll introduce one type of connection
used for WANs, known as leased lines.
Then another WAN technology known as MPLS,
multi protocol label switching, which provides
us with a kind of VPN, virtual private network.
Then I’ll introduce some options for internet
connectivity, and finally explain internet
VPNs, which allow us to create virtual private
networks over the public Internet.
So, we’ll cover a lot of topics, but we
won’t be going in depth about any of them.
To cover just the topic of MPLS in depth,
for example, would require a full course at
least as long as this entire CCNA course.
For the CCNA exam, all that’s expected is
that you have a basic understanding of these
technologies and their purpose.
As always, make sure to watch until the end
of the video for a bonus practice question
from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA, the
best practice exams for the CCNA.
Okay let me introduce the concept of WANs
first.
As you know already, WAN stands for Wide Area
Network, and the name should give you a good
idea of what a WAN is.
A WAN is a network that extends over a large
geographic area.
For example, between cities, between countries,
etc.
So, WANs are used to connect geographically
separate LANs.
For example, if a company has an office in
New York, an office in Toronto, and an office
in London, each of those offices is a LAN,
Local Area Network, and the connections between
them form a WAN, Wide Area Network.
Although the Internet itself can be considered
a WAN, the term WAN is typically used to refer
to an enterprise’s private connections that
connect their offices, data centers, and other
sites together.
So, as I said the Internet can be considered
a WAN, but when we say WAN we usually aren’t
referring to the Internet.
Although there is another kind of technology
that can be used over the Internet to create
private connections.
Over public and shared connections like the
Internet, VPNs, Virtual Private Networks,
can be used to create private connections.
I’ll show you a few kinds of VPNs in this
video.
Note that there have been many different WAN
technologies over the years.
Depending on the location, some will be available
and some will not be.
I won’t cover every possible WAN technology
in this video.
Also, technologies which are considered legacy
in one country might still be used in other
countries.
Legacy basically means old and no longer used
or rarely used.
Here’s an example of a WAN.
This enterprise has a central data center
and some offices.
For the purpose of this video we’re not
focusing on the LAN so I won’t show all
of the devices in each LAN, but each of these,
office A, office B, office C, as well as the
data center, is its own LAN.
Each office is connected to the data center
via a leased line, which is a kind of dedicated
physical connection between two sites.
This is not a shared connection, it’s not
connected to the Internet, it’s a private
connection that the company uses to connect
its sites together.
By the way, do you know a word for this kind
of topology, in which multiple devices connect
to one central device?
In the last video I introduced the term star
topology, however when talking about WANs
a more common term is hub and spoke.
The central site, the data center, is called
the hub, and the office sites which all connect
to the hub are called spokes.
One major advantage of a hub-and-spoke topology,
as opposed to a full-mesh topology, is that
it’s easier to centrally control what traffic
is allowed and what isn’t.
All traffic between offices can be sent to
a firewall in the data center, for example,
and it can control which traffic is allowed
and which isn’t.
So, remember that term, hub and spoke topology.
Now, I have to say that this diagram is actually
not exactly an accurate representation of
leased lines.
This is a better representation of what’s
actually going on.
Rather than a single physical cable directly
connecting each site, each site connects to
a service provider, which connects the sites
together.
I will introduce leased lines soon, but these
connections use serial cables.
I briefly introduced serial connections in
the OSPF section of the course, they use Layer
2 encapsulations like HDLC and PPP, not Ethernet.
However these days WAN connections via Ethernet
are more and more common.
Optical fiber connections allow much longer
cables than the traditional copper UTP Ethernet
cables, so these days WANs using Ethernet
fiber optic cables are quite common.
Note that the CCNA focuses on the WAN connection
from the perspective of the enterprise, not
the service provider.
So we won’t spend much time talking about
exactly what’s going on inside of the service
provider network, the gray box in this slide
and the previous one.
If you want to learn more about that, consider
the CCNP service provider track in your future
studies.
Now, the Internet can also be used for an
enterprise’s WAN connections between sites.
However, the Internet itself is not a private
network.
It’s a shared, public network, so sending
important data over the Internet unprotected
is not a good idea.
In this case, note that each site has a physical
connection to the Internet.
However, to send traffic between sites the
company will set up VPNs, virtual private
networks.
We’ll cover these in greater detail soon,
but basically the packets will be encrypted
so that the contents can only be read by the
intended recipients.
Then, the encrypted packet is encapsulated
within a new packet and sent.
This means that the original packet will remain
protected even when sent over the public Internet.
Okay, so that was a quick introduction to
a few WAN options.
Now let’s take a slightly deeper look at
each one, starting with leased lines.
A leased line is a dedicated physical link,
typically connecting two sites.
As I mentioned before, they use serial connections
with PPP or HDLC encapsulation.
So, these aren’t Ethernet links.
The layer 2 encapsulation is not Ethernet,
but rather PPP or HDLC.
There are various standards that provide different
speeds, and different standards are available
in different countries.
This chart from Wikipedia shows some of the
standards.
Now, there are a lot here and I don’t think
you need to memorize them all.
Of course, if you want you can make flashcards
to try to memorize all of these standards
and their speeds, but I think that will be
unnecessary for the CCNA exam.
Let me just point out a few.
In North America the standard names begin
with T, as in T1, T2, and T3.
I will include flashcards for these three
in the deck I provide, but keep in mind no
one except a few people at Cisco know exactly
what will be asked on the exam so it’s up
to you if you want to memorize more or not.
In Europe, as well as other regions, the standards
begin with E, for example E1, E2, and E3.
Again, I will include flashcards for these
three standards.
Now, as I mentioned before Ethernet WAN technologies
are becoming more and more popular, rather
than these serial leased lines.
Why is that?
It’s because leased lines tend to have a
higher cost, higher installation lead time,
meaning it takes a longer time to actually
install the line, and they also have slower
speeds than Ethernet connections provide.
Okay let’s move on to another WAN option,
MPLS.
MPLS stands for Multi Protocol Label Switching.
Similar to the Internet, service providers’
MPLS networks are shared infrastructure because
many customer enterprises connect to and share
the same infrastructure to make WAN connections.
However, the label switching in the name of
MPLS allows VPNs, virtual private networks,
to be created over the MPLS infrastructure
through the use of labels.
These labels are used to separate the traffic
of different customers as it travels over
the shared infrastructure, and make sure it
doesn’t mix with the traffic of other customers.
There are a few basic terms you should know
for MPLS.
CE router means Customer Edge router.
This is the customer’s router that is connected
to the next kind of router, PE router, which
means Provider Edge router.
Finally there are P routers, these are the
Provider core routers that are not at the
edge of the network and don’t connect to
customer routers.
This diagram should make it easier to understand.
Notice the CE routers are at the edge of the
customer networks, and they connect to the
PE routers, the provider edge routers.
Within the provider network there are also
P routers which form the internal network
infrastructure of the service provider’s
network, but don’t connect directly to the
customer routers.
When the PE routers receive frames from the
CE routers, they add a label to the frame.
This label is actually placed in between the
Layer 2 Ethernet header and the Layer 3 IP
header, so sometimes MPLS is called a Layer
2.5 protocol.
These labels are then used to make forwarding
decisions within the service provider network,
not the destination IP.
In regular IP routing the router checks the
destination IP and compares it to its routing
table to decide where to forward the packet.
But not in MPLS.
MPLS routers use the MPLS label to decide
where to forward the packet.
Now, the CE routers do not use MPLS, it is
only used by the PE and P routers.
The CE routers do not have to run MPLS or
even be able to run MPLS.
Now, there are a few different kinds of VPNs
that can be provided by MPLS.
When using a Layer 3 MPLS VPN, the CE and
PE routers peer using OSPF for example, to
share routing information.
Now, it doesn’t have to be OSPF, it could
be another routing protocol.
Or the customer could just write static routes,
using the PE routers as the next hop.
But let’s assume a routing protocol is being
used.
For example, in the diagram below office A’s
CE will peer with one PE, and office B’s
CE will peer with the other PE, like this.
Then, office A’s CE will learn about office
B’s routes via this OSPF peering, and office
B’s CE will learn about office A’s routes,
too.
So, this is a Layer 3 MPLS VPN.
The CE routers either form dynamic routing
protocol peerings with the PE routers, or
they use the PE routers as the next hop of
their static routes.
A Layer 2 MPLS VPN can also be used, in which
the CE and PE routers do not form peerings.
So, the entire service provider network is
transparent to the CE routers.
Although the CE routers will physically connect
to a PE router, it is in effect like the two
CE routers are directly connected.
Their WAN interfaces will be in the same subnet.
If a routing protocol is used, the two CE
routers will peer directly with each other
like this.
In this case, the service provider network
is still running MPLS just like before, but
it’s doing so in a way that it’s like
the entire service provider network is just
a big switch connecting the two CE routers
together like this.
The CE routers are physically connected to
the PE routers, and the entire PE network
is operating like a big switch connecting
the CE routers together.
Now, MPLS is a technology that runs in the
service provider network, but many different
technologies, many different kinds of connections,
can be used to actually connect to the service
provider’s MPLS network for WAN service.
In this case office A and office B are connecting
via fiber optic Ethernet.
Perhaps office C is connecting to the service
provider via wireless 4G or 5G.
Office D might be connecting via CATV, a cable
TV connection as is often used for home Internet
access.
And office E might use a serial connection,
a leased line to connect to the service provider’s
MPLS infrastructure.
So, these sites are connecting to the service
provider with a variety of connection types,
and they will all be able to communicate with
each other over the service provider’s MPLS
infrastructure.
Okay, that’s all for MPLS.
For the CCNA exam, you should know that MPLS
uses labels to forward traffic, not IP addresses.
You should know the terms CE router, PE router,
and P router.
You should know that Layer 3 MPLS VPNs have
CE routers and PE routers forming peerings
using a routing protocol such as OSPF, whereas
in Layer 2 MPLS VPNs it is as if the CE routers
are all directly connected to each other.
The service provider routers are totally transparent,
acting like a big switch connecting the CE
routers together.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this video,
just the topic of MPLS alone would require
a huge course to cover in depth, but let’s
move on now to talk about the Internet.
Before focusing on Internet VPNs, let’s
take a look at Internet connections in general.
There are countless ways for an enterprise
to connect to the Internet.
For example, private WAN technologies such
as leased lines and MPLS VPNs can be used
to connect to a service provider’s Internet
infrastructure.
Although the leased line or MPLS VPN itself
is a private network, it can be used as a
means to access the public network that is
the Internet.
In addition, technologies such as CATV and
DSL, which are commonly used by consumers
for home Internet access, can also be used
by an enterprise.
I’m repeating myself, but for both enterprise
and consumer internet access, fiber optic
ethernet connections are growing in popularity
due to the high speeds they provide over long
distances.
But now let’s briefly look at two Internet
access technologies that I mentioned above,
cable Internet and DSL.
First let’s look at DSL, which stands for
Digital Subscriber Line.
DSL provides internet connectivity to customers
over phone lines, and can share the same phone
line that is already installed in most homes.
So, this is very convenient for both the service
provider and the customer.
Now, there is one extra device here that I
haven’t really talked about in this course
except for a brief mention in the previous
video.
That is the modem.
A modem, which stands for modulator-demodulator,
is required to convert data into a format
suitable to be sent over the phone lines.
The modem might be a separate device, as in
the diagram, or it might be incorporated into
the home router.
This connects the network to the service provider
over the phone lines.
But there is another common kind of communication
line installed in most homes that can also
be used for Internet access.
Let’s look at that next.
Cable Internet is a similar concept to DSL,
although of course if you look at the technical
details it is different.
But it provides Internet access via the same
CATV, cable television, lines used for TV
service.
So, just like DSL, it takes advantage of already-installed
lines and provides Internet access over them.
Like DSL, a cable modem is required to convert
data into a format suitable to be sent over
the CATV cables.
And also like a DSL modem, the cable modem
can be a separate device or built into the
home router.
Now, for a home user, having one connection
to the Internet isn’t a problem.
It’s a bit annoying if you lose Internet
access, but it’s not a disaster.
However, for many companies Internet access
is essential to their operations.
So, it’s best to have redundant Internet
connections, and there are a few terms you
should know.
First, if you have 1 connection to 1 ISP,
it’s called single homed.
This is like a standard home Internet connection.
For an enterprise, this is not ideal, because
there is no redundancy here.
If you have 2 connections to that same ISP,
it’s called dual homed.
This provides some redundancy, but still not
ideal.
If you have 1 connection to each of 2 ISPs,
it’s called multihomed.
This improves the redundancy because if something
happens to 1 ISP, you still have Internet
access via the other one.
And finally there is dual multihomed, 2 connections
to each of 2 ISPs.
This provides the most redundancy.
Depending on the company, this might not be
necessary or worth the cost.
So, make sure you know these four terms.
Single homed, dual homed, multihomed, and
dual multihomed.
Okay, that’s enough about Internet access
for now.
Let’s move on to the final topic, Internet
VPNs.
Private WAN services such as leased lines
and MPLS provide security because each customer’s
traffic is separated by using dedicated physical
connections, as in leased lines, or by MPLS
tags that separate the traffic.
However, when using the Internet as a WAN
to connect sites together, there is no built-in
security by default.
So, to provide secure communications over
a shared network like the Internet, VPNs (virtual
private networks) are used.
We will cover two kinds of Internet VPNs.
First, site-to-site VPNs using IPsec, and
second, remote-access VPNs using TLS.
So let’s get right into the first one, site-to-site
VPNs using IPsec.
A site-to-site VPN is a VPN between two devices
and is used to connect two sites together
over the Internet.
In the diagram below office A and office B
are both connected to the Internet, and we
will use a site-to-site VPN between them so
that the devices at each office can communicate
securely with each other.
In a site-to-site VPN, a VPN tunnel is created
between the two devices by encapsulating the
original IP packet with a VPN header and a
new IP header.
When using IPsec, the original packet is encrypted
before being encapsulated with the new header.
This is what makes IPsec secure.
So, the router will take the original packet,
encrypt it so that it can’t be read, add
an IPsec VPN header and a new IP header, and
then forward it over the Internet.
Let me demonstrate that process in the diagram.
We have configured an IPsec tunnel between
these two routers.
The PC at office A wants to send traffic to
the PC at office B, so it first sends the
unencrypted data to its default gateway, the
router.
The router encrypts the data, and adds a VPN
header and new IP header.
Then the encrypted data in the new packet
is sent over the Internet to the other end
of the tunnel.
The receiving router decrypts the data, and
sends it to the destination PC.
That’s a very basic overview of how IPsec
VPNs work.
Let’s summarize that process.
When the router receives a packet that is
to be sent over the VPN, it combines the original
packet and a session key, also called an encryption
key, and runs them through an encryption formula.
Then the sending device, the router, encapsulates
the encrypted packet with a VPN header and
a new IP header.
The new packet is then sent to the device
on the other end of the tunnel, the receiving
router.
This device then decrypts the data to get
the original packet, and forwards it to its
destination.
Of course, this is an oversimplification of
the process, but at this point in your studies
that is okay.
Now, note that in a site-to-site VPN a tunnel
is formed only between two tunnel endpoints,
for example the two routers connected to the
Internet.
All other devices in each site don’t need
to create a VPN for themselves.
They can send unencrypted data to their site’s
router, which will encrypt it and forward
it in the tunnel as described above.
The next type of VPN we will look at, remote
access VPNs, is different.
Before looking at remote-access VPNs, I want
to point out a few limitations of standard
IPsec.
First, IPsec doesn’t support broadcast and
multicast traffic, only unicast.
This means that routing protocols such as
OSPF can’t be used over the tunnels, because
routing protocols rely on multicast traffic.
We can solve this with GRE over IPsec, which
we’ll look at next.
Another potential problem for large networks
is that configuring a full mesh of tunnels
between many sites is a labor-intensive task.
It takes a lot of time and careful planning
to configure dozens of VPNs.
This problem can be solved with Cisco’s
DMVPN.
Let’s briefly look at each of the above
solutions.
First, GRE over IPsec.
GRE, which stands for Generic Routing Encapsulation,
creates tunnels like IPsec, but it does not
encrypt the original packet, so it is not
secure.
However it has the advantage of being able
to encapsulate a wide variety of Layer 3 protocols
as well as broadcast and multicast messages.
So, to get the flexibility of GRE with the
security of IPsec, GRE over IPsec can be used.
The original packet will be encapsulated by
a GRE header and a new IP header, and then
the GRE packet will be encrypted and encapsulated
within an IPsec VPN header and a new IP header.
So, here’s the original IP packet.
A GRE header and new IP header are added to
it.
Then this new packet is encrypted, and an
IPsec header and new IP header are added.
We have combined GRE with IPsec.
That’s all I’ll say about GRE over IPsec
for now.
You don’t need to know more than this for
the CCNA.
Now, regarding the problem of configuring
full-mesh IPsec tunnels, let’s look at DMVPN.
DMVPN, which stands for Dynamic Multipoint
VPN, is a Cisco-developed solution that allows
routers to dynamically create a full mesh
of IPsec tunnels without having to manually
configure every single tunnel.
This is a major oversimplification, but let
me demonstrate it in two steps.
First, you configure IPsec tunnels to a hub
site.
Notice that the router at the top is the hub,
and each spoke router has an IPsec tunnel
to that hub router, but not to the other spoke
routers.
That’s part 1.
Then, the hub router gives each router information
about how to form an IPsec tunnel with the
other routers.
So, we only configured hub-and-spoke tunnels,
but the routers were able to form a full mesh
of IPsec tunnels on their own.
To summarize, DMVPN provides the configuration
simplicity of hub-and-spoke, meaning each
router only needs one tunnel to be configured,
and the efficiency of spoke-to-spoke communication,
because spoke routers can communicate directly
without traffic passing through the hub.
Some companies might want all traffic to flow
through the hub site so that a central firewall
can control the traffic, but other companies
might want the efficient direct spoke-to-spoke
communication that a full mesh provides.
Now let’s move on to the other major type
of VPN, remote-access VPNs.
Whereas site-to-site VPNs are used to make
a point-to-point connection between two sites
over the Internet, remote VPNs are used to
allow end devices such as PCs and mobile phones
to access the company’s internal resources
securely over the Internet.
Remote-access VPNs typically use TLS, transport
layer security, as opposed to site-to-site
VPNs which typically use IPsec.
TLS is also what provides security for HTTPS,
HTTP secure.
It was formerly known as SSL, Secure Sockets
Layer and developed by Netscape, but it was
renamed to TLS when it was standardized by
the IETF.
VPN client software, for example Cisco AnyConnect,
is installed on end devices, for example company-provided
laptops that employees use to work from home.
If you work for a company from home, your
device almost certainly has a kind of VPN
client software installed.
These end devices then form secure tunnels
to one of the company’s routers or firewalls
acting as a TLS server.
This allows the end users to securely access
resources on the company’s internal network
without being directly connected to the company
network.
Here’s a diagram to help you visualize it.
The end devices on the left want to access
resources on the company’s server in the
data center on the right.
They all have Cisco AnyConnect installed,
and it is also configured on the firewall
at the data center.
So, the devices each form a TLS VPN tunnel
to the firewall, and then they are able to
securely communicate with the company’s
internal servers through the tunnel.
Note that, just like IPsec, TLS involves encrypting
packets and adding additional headers, but
for the sake of time we’ll skip over those
details.
So, finally let’s briefly compare site-to-site
and remote-access VPNs.
Site-to-site VPNs typically use IPsec, and
remote-access VPNs typically use TLS.
Both of them are protocols that you don’t
need to know in detail for the CCNA exam,
but you should definitely know their names
and have a basic understanding of their purposes.
Site-to-site VPNs provide service to many
devices within the sites they are connecting.
One IPsec tunnel between two routers or firewalls
provides traffic security for all hosts within
the sites they are connecting.
On the other hand, remote-access VPNs provide
service to the one end device the VPN client
software is installed on.
Instead of connecting two sites together,
they connect one end device to a site.
Site-to-site VPNs are typically used to permanently
connect two sites securely over the Internet.
And remote-access VPNs are typically used
to provide on-demand access for end devices
that want to securely access company resources
while connected to a network which is not
secure.
These two types of VPNs are specifically mentioned
in the CCNA exam topics, so make sure you
know the differences between them.
Okay, before moving on to the quiz let’s
review what we covered.
This video was just a shallow look at various
different WAN technologies.
Each topic in this video is very important
for network engineers to understand, but when
you’re just starting your journey you don’t
have to learn all of the details right away,
and the CCNA exam doesn’t expect you to
know them all.
So, first I introduced WANs.
Wide Area Networks are used to connect geographically
distant LANs, Local Area Networks, together.
For example, to connect two offices together
which are located in different cities or countries.
Then, we looked at leased lines.
Leased lines are dedicated physical connections
that can be used to connect sites together
to form a WAN.
For many reasons they are being replaced by
newer technologies, but you should still know
about them.
Then we looked at MPLS VPNs.
MPLS allows enterprises to form WANs over
a service provider’s MPLS infrastructure.
Although the traffic of many different customers
will be passing over this infrastructure,
the label-switching aspect of MPLS allows
secure VPNs to be formed over the shared infrastructure.
If you want to really learn how MPLS works,
consider the CCNP service provider track in
the future.
Then we looked at a few ways to connect to
the Internet, for example DSL and cable Internet.
And finally Internet VPNs, specifically site-to-site
VPNs using IPsec and remote-access VPNs using
TLS.
These provide secure connectivity over the
Internet, which is a shared public network
and not secure by default.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which of the following leased line standards
provides 1.544 Mbps of bandwidth?
Pause the video now to select the correct
answer.
The answer is B, T1.
Here’s that wikipedia chart again.
I doubt that you’ll have to memorize all
of these for the CCNA exam, but it doesn’t
hurt to be familiar with them.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 2.
Jeremy’s IT Lab Professional IT Training
Inc. uses an MPLS VPN to connect its various
offices together.
Which of the following routers does NOT run
MPLS?
Pause the video to select the correct answer.
The answer is C, CE.
In MPLS, PE, provider edge, and P, provider
core routers run MPLS to provide MPLS VPN
services for their customers.
However, there is no need for the CE, customer
edge, routers to run MPLS.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following MPLS VPN types allows
CE routers to directly form OSPF peerings
with each other?
Pause the video to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, Layer 2 MPLS VPN.
Although MPLS is sometimes called a Layer
2.5 protocol because the labels are inserted
between the Layer 2 and Layer 3 headers, there
is no such thing as a Layer 2.5 MPLS VPN.
And in Layer 3 MPLS VPNs, the OSPF peerings
would be made with PE routers, not between
CE routers.
In a Layer 2 MPLS VPN, the entire service
provider network is transparent to the customer,
and it is as if the service provider network
is a switch connecting the two CE routers
together.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following Internet access technologies
takes advantage of already-installed phone
lines?
Pause the video to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, DSL.
Digital Subscriber Line provides connectivity
to a service provider’s Internet infrastructure
over phone lines, which are typically already
installed in most modern homes.
As a bonus, it allows users to access the
Internet and use the phone at the same time,
which was not allowed in previous technologies
that used the phone lines for Internet access.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following protocols can be used
in combination with IPsec to provide more
flexibility by allowing multicast traffic
to be forwarded in the tunnel?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, GRE.
Generic Routing Encapsulation is more flexible
than IPsec because it allows multicast as
well as broadcast packets to be encapsulated
and sent in the tunnel.
However, GRE isn’t secure because it doesn’t
encrypt the original packet.
So, the GRE packet can be encrypted and then
encapsulated using IPsec to provide the benefits
of both IPsec and GRE.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.