Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like
these videos, please subscribe to follow along
with the series. Also, please like and leave
a comment, and share the video to help spread
this free series of videos. Thanks for your
help. In this video we’ll cover two main
topics, virtualization and cloud. They are
mentioned in exam topic 1.2.f, on-premises
and cloud, and 1.12, explain virtualization
fundamentals (virtual machines). Although
they are separate topics, they are related
because virtualization is an essential part
of cloud services. If you want to really go
in depth about these topics, consider looking
into certifications from cloud providers like
AWS, Azure, and GCP, or VMware certifications
for virtualization.
Here’s what we’ll cover in these videos.
First, I’ll give an introduction to virtualization,
talking about virtual servers and virtual
networks. Then I’ll introduce cloud computing,
talking about its essential characteristics,
service models, and deployment models. Finally
I’ll briefly talk about connecting to public
clouds, via the Internet or a private WAN.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
video for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA, the best practice
exams for the CCNA.
The first topic for today is virtual severs,
but first let’s look at some server hardware.
Although Cisco is more known for their networking
devices, such as routers, switches, and firewalls,
they also offer hardware servers such as their
UCS, unified computing system. Here are some
examples of Cisco UCS servers. Although Cisco
offers these hardware servers, the largest
vendors of hardware servers include Dell EMC,
HPE, which is Hewlett Packard Enterprise,
and IBM, but there are many other large vendors
too. If you go to a data center, you’ll
see racks full of servers like these.
Before talking about virtualization, let’s
see how servers work without virtualization.
Before virtualization, there was a one-to-one
relationship between a physical server and
an operating system. In the diagram on the
left you can see that. On top of the server’s
hardware components there is one operating
system running, perhaps it’s a Linux server.
In that operating system, apps providing services
such as a web server, email server, etc would
run. Again, that is shown in the diagram.
One physical server would be used for the
web server, one for the email server, one
for the database server, etc. Now, it is possible
to run all servers in a single operating system
on a single physical server, but this is not
a good idea because if the servers aren’t
isolated from each other a problem on a single
app could affect all of the other apps. However,
using one physical server per app is inefficient
for multiple reasons. First, each physical
server is expensive and takes up space, power,
etc. Also the resources on each physical server,
for example CPU, RAM, Storage, and NIC capacity,
are typically under-used. NIC means Network
Interface Card, by the way, the part of the
server that connects to the network. This
is how a traditional server operates.
But with virtualization, it looks a bit different.
Virtualization allows us to break the one-to-one
relationship of hardware to OS, allowing multiple
OS’s to run on a single physical server.
Each instance is called a VM, virtual machine.
In the diagram on the left, three virtual
machines are running on a single physical
server. A hypervisor is used to manage and
allocate the hardware resources such as CPU
and RAM to each VM. Another name for a hypervisor
is a VMM, virtual machine monitor. The type
of hypervisor which runs directly on top of
the hardware is called a Type 1 hypervisor,
and a couple examples are VMware ESXi and
Microsoft Hyper-V. So, the diagram on the
left is an example of a server with a Type
1 hypervisor, it’s running directly on top
of the hardware. They are also called bare-metal
hypervisors, because they run directly on
the hardware, the metal. You might also hear
them called native hypervisors. This is the
type of hypervisor used in data center environments.
They are efficient because the hypervisor
runs directly on the hardware and requires
few resources itself, leaving more for the
VMs running on the hypervisor. But let’s
look at the other type of hypervisor, Type
2.
Type 2 hypervisors run as a program on an
operating system like a regular computer program.
Examples include VMware Workstation and Oracle
VirtualBox. You can download these and run
them on your home PC or laptop, and then run
VMs inside. The OS running directly on the
hardware is called the host OS, and the OS
running in a VM is called a guest OS. In the
diagram on the left there is a host OS running
some apps, including a Type 2 hypervisor.
And on top of the hypervisor, there are two
VMs running a guest OS, with their own apps
running inside. Another name for a type 2
hypervisor is hosted hypervisor. Although
type 2 hypervisors are rarely used in data
center environments, they are common on personal-use
devices, for example if a Mac or Linux user
needs to run an app that is only supported
on Windows, or vice versa. In fact, for the
next lab video we’ll download a free Type
2 hypervisor and then run a virtual machine
inside of it.
Okay, so now you know the absolute basics
of virtualization, type 1 and type 2 hypervisors.
But why should we use virtualization? I think
there’s no better place to look for answers
than the king of virtualization, VMware. So,
here is some information directly from VMware’s
site. Virtualization provides partitioning,
so you can run multiple operating systems
on one physical machine and divide the system
resources between them. This solves the problem
of hardware resource under-use, which I mentioned
earlier. Virtualization also provides isolation,
for example fault isolation. Remember I said
it’s a bad idea to have all of your servers
running on a single OS in a single physical
server? By running each server in a separate
virtual machine, they are isolated and can’t
affect each other if a fault occurs. Virtualization
also provides encapsulation, so you can easily
save a VM, move it around and copy it as easily
as a regular file. Virtualization also provides
hardware independence, so you can create or
move any VM to any physical server. As long
as the hypervisor you are using can run on
the physical server, it doesn’t matter what
kind of VM you run on top of that hypervisor.
And here is a graphic, again from VMware.
Virtualization provides reduced capital costs,
because you need fewer physical servers, as
well as reduced operating costs because fewer
physical servers means less space, power,
and cooling is needed. VMs also require less
work to set up, which is another reduction
in operating costs. Downtime can be reduced
or eliminated because it’s easy to deploy
a VM to multiple physical servers for redundancy.
VMs also provide increased productivity, efficiency,
agility, and responsiveness. That sounds like
a bunch of buzzwords and I’m not going to
explain each one, one by one, but VMs are
definitely more efficient and agile compared
to traditional physical-only servers. Speed
is also a big benefit. It’s much quicker
to add a new VM than ask your boss for approval
to order a new physical server, order the
server, wait for it to arrive, mount it on
the rack, connect the cables, configure it,
etc.
Now, regarding virtual networks I’m just
going to briefly explain how VMs can connect
to each other and to the external network,
outside of the physical host. VMs are connected
to each other and the external network via
a virtual switch running on the hypervisor.
The hypervisor will provide a virtual switch
to use, or alternatively you can run a Cisco
virtual switch on the hypervisor, for example.
Just like a regular switch, the vSwitch’s
interfaces can run as access or trunk ports
and use VLANs to separate the VMs at Layer
2. Notice that, in this example, two of the
VMs are in VLAN 10 and one is in VLAN 20.
Interfaces on the virtual switch then connect
to the physical NIC or NICs of the server
to communicate with the external network.
Now, look at the connection between the physical
NICs of the server and the physical switches.
We can use a vPC, virtual port channel, to
form a portchannel to two separate physical
switches for redundancy. This is not something
you have to know for the CCNA, I just wanted
to point it out because it’s commonly used
in data centers. Okay, that’s all about
virtualization for now. Virtualization is
a huge topic in modern day IT, and although
you don’t have to be a virtualization specialist,
you definitely do have to know about it.
So let’s finally get into cloud. Traditional
IT infrastructure deployments were some combination
of the following. First, on-premises. This
means that all servers, network devices, and
other infrastructure are located on company
property. From the desktops, to the routers,
firewalls, web servers, database servers,
etc, all equipment is purchased and owned
by the company using it, and they are also
responsible for the space, power, and cooling
required for the devices. Another option is
colocation, data centers that rent out space
for customers to put their infrastructure,
such as their servers and network devices.
Of course, devices such as desktops, wireless
access points, etc are still in the company’s
building, but servers and most network infrastructure
will be in the colocation data center. The
data center provides the space, electricity,
and cooling for the devices in the data center.
In addition to that, they provide the physical
security as well. The servers, network devices,
etc are still the responsibility of the end
customer, although they are not located on
the customer’s premises. So, traditionally
a company would use on-premises, or a combination
of on-premises and colocation. But cloud services
provide an alternative that is hugely popular
nowadays, and is continuing to grow. Now,
most people associate cloud with public cloud
providers such as AWS. And although this is
the most common use of cloud services, it’s
not the only one. So, let’s look at what
cloud computing actually is.
The American NIST, national institute of standards
and technology, defined cloud computing in
special publication 800-145. It’s free to
read here. It’s a very short document, the
PDF is 7 pages but the actual content is only
2 pages, so I highly recommend reading it.
Actually, for this part of the video I’ll
mostly be quoting from this document and giving
a bit more explanation. First, here is the
NIST’s definition of cloud computing. ‘Cloud
computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous,
convenient, on-demand network access to a
shared pool of configurable computing resources
(e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications,
and services) that can be rapidly provisioned
and released with minimal management effort
or service provider interaction. This cloud
model is composed of five essential characteristics,
three service models, and four deployment
models.’ Pause the video and take some time
to read it slowly, it’s important. Now,
to help understand the above definition, to
understand what the cloud is, let’s look
at the following outlined in SP 800-145. The
five essential characteristics, the three
service models, and the four deployment models
of cloud. Basically, these are what Cisco
expects you to know about cloud for the CCNA
exam. You don’t need to know about specific
services offered by specific cloud providers.
If you have a basic understanding of these
five essential characteristics, three service
models, and four deployment models, you’ll
be set.
These are the five essential characteristics
of cloud computing. If a service has some
of these characteristics, but not all, it
will generally not be considered a true cloud
service. The characteristics are On-demand
self-service, broad network access, resource
pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service.
Let’s briefly look at each of those.
First, on-demand self-service. Here is the
NIST’s definition. ‘A consumer can unilaterally
provision computing capabilities, such as
server time and network storage, as needed
automatically without requiring human interaction
with each service provider.’ So, the customer
is able to use the service, or stop using
the service, freely through a web portal,
without directly interacting with the service
provider. To set up some virtual servers on
AWS, Amazon Web Services, you don’t have
to contact AWS, ask them to send you a quote
for 5 virtual servers, send them the payment
and then wait for the servers to be set up.
You login to the web portal and do it all
yourself, no need to interact with anyone
at AWS.
Next, broad network access. Here’s the NIST’s
explanation. ‘Capabilities are available
over the network and accessed through standard
mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous
thin or thick client platforms (e.g., mobile
phones, tablets, laptops, and workstations).’
So, the service is available through standard
network connections, for example the Internet
or private WAN connections, and can be accessed
through many kinds of devices. Speaking about
AWS again, you can access their web portal
through a PC, smartphone, or any device that
connects to the internet. And if you provision
a virtual server on AWS, you can connect to
it over the Internet or through a variety
of other WAN options.
Next, resource pooling. ‘The provider’s
computing resources are pooled to serve multiple
consumers using a multi-tenant model, with
different physical and virtual resources dynamically
assigned and reassigned according to consumer
demand. There is a sense of location independence
in that the customer generally has no control
or knowledge over the exact location of the
provided resources but may be able to specify
location at a higher level of abstraction
(e.g., country, state, or datacenter). Examples
of resources include storage, processing,
memory, and network bandwidth.’ To summarize,
a pool of resources is provided by the service
provider, and when a customer requests a service,
for example creates a new VM, the resources
to fulfill that request are allocated from
the shared pool. Inside of AWS’s data centers
they have tons of storage drives, servers
with tons of CPU and RAM, etc. This is a shared
pool of resources used by AWS customers. When
you create a VM on AWS, it is assigned a portion
of those shared resources.
Next is rapid elasticity. ‘Capabilities
can be elastically provisioned and released,
in some cases automatically, to scale rapidly
outward and inward commensurate with demand.
To the consumer, the capabilities available
for provisioning often appear to be unlimited
and can be appropriated in any quantity at
any time.’ To summarize, customers can quickly
expand the services they use in the cloud,
for example add new VMs, expand storage, etc,
from a pool of resources that appears to be
infinite. If you need to add 100 new servers
right now, AWS isn’t going to tell you ‘sorry,
we don’t have enough resources for you to
do that.’ Of course, the resource pool isn’t
infinite, but it should be large enough to
appear infinite to the customer. And in addition
to quickly expanding their use of services,
a customer should be able to quickly reduce
their use of services when they don’t need
them.
Here’s the last of the five essential characteristics,
measured service. ‘Cloud systems automatically
control and optimize resource use by leveraging
a metering capability at some level of abstraction
appropriate to the type of service (e.g.,
storage, processing, bandwidth, and active
user accounts). Resource usage can be monitored,
controlled, and reported, providing transparency
for both the provider and consumer of the
utilized service.’ So, the cloud service
provider measures the customer’s usage of
cloud resources, and the customer can measure
their own use as well. A customer should never
be surprised by a big bill at the end of the
month, because their usage is clearly visible
within the web portal. And customers are charged
based on usage, for example X dollars per
gigabyte of storage per day.
Okay, those are the five essential characteristics
of cloud computing. On-demand self-service,
broad network access, resource pooling, rapid
elasticity, and measured service. You definitely
should have a basic understanding of these
for the CCNA.
Next, the three service models of cloud. In
cloud computing, everything is provided on
a service model. For example, rather than
the end user buying a physical server, mounting
it on a rack, installing the hypervisor, creating
the VMs, etc, the service provider offers
all of this as a service. There are a variety
of services referred to as something as a
service, something a a s. The three main service
models of cloud computing as defined by the
NIST are software as a service (SaaS), platform
as a service (PaaS), and infrastructure as
a service (IaaS). Let’s look at each one.
First, software as a service, SaaS. As defined
by the NIST, ‘The capability provided to
the consumer is to use the provider’s applications
running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications
are accessible from various client devices
through either a thin client interface, such
as a web browser (e.g., web-based email),
or a program interface. The consumer does
not manage or control the underlying cloud
infrastructure including network, servers,
operating systems, storage, or even individual
application capabilities, with the possible
exception of limited user-specific application
configuration settings.’ Microsoft Office
365 is a popular example of SaaS. It’s Microsoft
Office (word, powerpoint, excel, etc.) provided
over Microsoft’s cloud infrastructure. But
there are other examples such as Google’s
G Suite which includes Gmail. This image from
Microsoft might help you understand. When
you’re using software as a service, the
service provider is basically in control of
everything, from the physical data center,
to the networks in the data center, to the
servers, the operating systems on the servers,
all tools running on the operating systems,
and the applications themselves. The end user,
the customer, simply uses the application,
for example Excel running on Office 365 as
provided by the service provider.
Next is Platform as a Service, PaaS. As defined
by the NIST, ‘The capability provided to
the consumer is to deploy onto the cloud infrastructure
consumer-created or acquired applications
created using programming languages, libraries,
services, and tools supported by the provider.
The consumer does not manage or control the
underlying cloud infrastructure including
network, servers, operating systems, or storage,
but has control over the deployed applications
and possibly configuration settings for the
application-hosting environment.’ Basically,
the service provider offers a platform for
developers to use to make applications. For
example AWS Lambda and Google App Engine are
two popular offerings. In the case of PaaS,
the service provider is in control of the
data centers, the networking and security,
the servers and storage, and operating systems
on the servers, as well as the tools running
on the operating systems. This provides a
platform that the customer can use to develop
their own applications, so notice that the
‘hosted applications’ on the left of the
diagram are not included within the scope
of platform as a service.
Finally there is infrastructure as a service,
IaaS. As defined by the NIST, ‘The capability
provided to the consumer is to provision processing,
storage, networks, and other fundamental computing
resources where the consumer is able to deploy
and run arbitrary software, which can include
operating systems and applications. The consumer
does not manage or control the underlying
cloud infrastructure but has control over
operating systems, storage, and deployed applications;
and possibly limited control of select networking
components (e.g., host firewalls).’ In earlier
examples I mentioned making VMs on AWS. Well,
that is an example of IaaS. Examples of IaaS
services include Amazon EC2 and Google Compute
Engine. So, the service provider takes care
of the physical data center, the network and
security, and server and storage infrastructure.
This provides infrastructure that the customer
can use for basically any purpose they want.
So, IaaS offers the most control to the customer.
The service provider just offers the underlying
infrastructure.
So, here are those three service models of
cloud computing once again. Software as a
Service, Platform as a Service, and Infrastructure
as a Service. These days you’ll hear a lot
of other kinds of ‘something’ as a service,
but these three form the foundation of cloud
services.
Now let’s look at the final group of concepts,
the four deployment models of cloud. Most
people assume that cloud means public cloud
providers such as AWS, Azure, and GCP. Although
it is true that this is the most common cloud
deployment model, it’s not the only one.
Here are the four deployment models of cloud
computing. Private, community, public, and
hybrid. Let’s examine each one.
First up, private cloud. According to the
NIST, ‘The cloud infrastructure is provisioned
for exclusive use by a single organization
comprising multiple consumers (e.g., business
units). It may be owned, managed, and operated
by the organization, a third party, or some
combination of them, and it may exist on or
off premises.’ Private clouds are generally
only used by large enterprises, or government
organizations. Although the cloud is private,
meaning exclusively used by a single organization,
it may be owned by a third party. For example,
AWS provides private cloud services for the
American department of defense. The infrastructure
is Amazon’s, but it’s reserved for use
by the DoD. Private clouds may be on or off
premises. This is important. Many people assume
that cloud and on-prem are two different things,
but that is not always the case. In a private
cloud, the same kinds of services are offered
as in public clouds, software, platform, and
infrastructure as a service, but the infrastructure
that forms the cloud is reserved for a single
organization.
Next, community cloud. According to the NIST,
‘The cloud infrastructure is provisioned
for exclusive use by a specific community
of consumers from organizations that have
shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements,
policy, and compliance considerations). It
may be owned, managed, and operated by one
or more of the organizations in the community,
a third party, or some combination of them,
and it may exist on or off premises.’ This
is the least common cloud deployment. It’s
similar to private cloud, but the infrastructure
is reserved for use by only a specific group
of organizations.
Now we have the most popular one, public cloud.
According to the NIST, The cloud infrastructure
is provisioned for open use by the general
public. It may be owned, managed, and operated
by a business, academic, or government organization,
or some combination of them. It exists on
the premises of the cloud provider. This is
by far the most common cloud deployment. Here
are some popular public cloud providers. AWS,
Azure, GCP, OCI, IBM, and Alibaba all offer
popular public cloud services, although AWS
has been a dominant number one for a long
time.
Finally we have hybrid cloud. According to
the NIST, ‘The cloud infrastructure is a
composition of two or more distinct cloud
infrastructures (private, community, or public)
that remain unique entities, but are bound
together by standardized or proprietary technology
that enables data and application portability
(e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing between
clouds).’ So, this is basically any combination
of the previous three deployment types, rather
than a totally unique kind of cloud deployment.
An example is a private cloud which can offload
to a public cloud when necessary due to resource
restrictions.
Okay, here’s a summary of the four deployment
models. Private cloud, community cloud, public
cloud, and hybrid cloud. Make sure you know
the basic definition of each of these deployment
types.
So, we covered a lot of concepts about the
cloud, here’s a summary of all of them.
Keep in mind that the NIST definition of cloud
computing was originally published in 2011,
and cloud computing is an always-evolving
set of technologies. However, the concepts
outlined in the document are the foundational
concepts of cloud computing that are still
true today. So, as I said before you should
have a general understanding of the five essential
characteristics, three service models, and
four deployment models of cloud computing.
Now, I introduced a lot of cloud concepts
and you can probably imagine some of the benefits
of using the cloud, but let me briefly introduce
just a few benefits. First is cost. The CapEx,
capital expenses, of buying hardware and software,
setting up data centers etc are reduced or
eliminated when using the cloud. Now, instead
the expenses are OpEx, operating expenses,
meaning regular small costs instead of one-time
large costs. For many companies, the cloud
provides an overall cost reduction, although
of course it can depend on the situation.
Cloud services are also very easy to scale
globally at a rapid pace. Services can be
set up and offered to customers from a geographic
location close to them. When you create a
virtual server in AWS, for example, you can
choose the country, as well as the region
within the country, which can provide better
service for those in the country or region.
Cloud services also offer speed and agility.
As I outlined earlier, services are provided
on demand and vast amounts of resources can
be provisioned within minutes. Productivity
can also be improved. Cloud services remove
the need for many time-consuming tasks such
as procuring physical servers, racking them,
cabling, installing and updating operating
systems, etc. This can also further lead to
reduced costs. Another benefit is reliability.
Backups in the cloud are very easy, and data
can be mirrored, meaning copied, at multiple
different geographic locations to support
disaster recovery. If one server dies, that’s
okay because there’s a copy somewhere else.
Now, although I list these as benefits of
the cloud, keep in mind that it doesn’t
mean that the cloud is always the best option.
Most companies these days use a combination
of on-premises equipment, colocation, and
public cloud. So, think of this as a partial
list of potential benefits, not a complete
list of absolute benefits. A company shouldn’t
use the cloud just because it’s popular
these days. They should weight the benefits
and drawbacks and make an informed decision.
Finally, let me briefly introduce how an enterprise
might connect their network to resources on
a public cloud. Since we already covered WAN
technologies in the previous video, this will
be very brief. I just want to point out that
there are multiple ways a company can connect
to their resources on a public cloud. For
example, through a private WAN such as an
MPLS VPN. Another option is to simply connect
via the Internet. This is very cheap, flexible,
and easy, but of course connecting through
the Internet is not as secure as a private
WAN connection. So, a VPN can be used to provide
a secure connection over the Internet to the
resources on the cloud. Okay, that’s all
I have to say about connections to the cloud.
Just be aware that, since these resources
are not on your premises, it’s not enough
to just set up the apps and servers. You also
have to think about how to securely connect
to them. And just like regular WAN connections,
redundant connections are always preferable.
Having a single point of failure which can
take down a network is never a good thing.
Okay, before moving on to the quiz let’s
review what we covered. First I introduced
virtualization, including Type 1 and Type
2 hypervisors. I spoke mostly about virtual
servers, but briefly mentioned how virtual
switches are used to connect VMs to other
VMs and to the external network. Then I introduced
cloud computing. Make sure you learn those
essential characteristics, service models,
and deployment models of cloud computing.
Those are the fundamentals of the cloud that
Cisco expects you to know for the CCNA exam.
Finally I briefly introduced how to connect
to the cloud. Basically, any of the WAN options
introduced in the previous video can also
be used to connect to resources on the cloud.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA. Okay, let’s go to quiz question
1.
Which statement about virtual machines is
true? Pause the video now to read the options
and select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, the hypervisor is used
to manage and allocate hardware resources
to VMs. This is the main role of the hypervisor.
As for B and C, the two definitions are reversed.
Type 2 hypervisors run on a host OS, and type
1 hypervisors run directly on top of the hardware.
And many VMs can exist on a single physical
server, so D is incorrect. Okay, let’s go
to question 2.
Which of the following hypervisor types is
known as a native hypervisor? Pause the video
now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, Type 1. Type 1 hypervisors
as known as native hypervisors, whereas Type
2 hypervisors are known as hosted hypervisors.
Type 3 hypervisors don’t exist, at least
not as a widely accepted term. Okay, let’s
go to question 3.
Which of the following is NOT an essential
characteristic of cloud computing? Pause the
video now to select the answer.
Okay, the answer is D, infinite resource pool.
Although cloud services should allow customers
to expand their resources so that it appears
as if the available pool is infinite, in reality
it is of course not infinite. The other options
here are essential characteristics of cloud
computing. The only one missing is on-demand
self-service. Okay, let’s go to question
4.
Which of the following cloud service types
allows customers to use applications running
on the provider’s cloud infrastructure?
Pause the video to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, SaaS, software as a
service. This image shows the scope of SaaS,
PaaS, and IaaS. In SaaS, the provider provides
everything ranging from the data center infrastructure
all the way to the app itself, and the customer
pays to use the app. Okay, let’s go to question
5.
Which of the following cloud deployment types
may exist off premises? Pause the video now
to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, all of the above. Whether
the cloud is public, private, community, or
a hybrid, they all can and, and usually do,
exist off premises. But keep in mind that
cloud doesn’t always mean off premises.
Private clouds in particular may be on premises,
within a building owned or operated by the
company using the cloud. Although off premises
is much more common for cloud deployments,
keep in mind it’s not the only option. Okay,
that’s all for the quiz. Now let’s take a look at a bonus question in Boson Software's ExSim for CCNA.