Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a complete course for the CCNA.
In this video we will cover a topic related
to virtualization, that is containers.
Containers are similar to VMs, virtual machines,
however there are some key differences that
you must understand.
If you are interested in the field of DevOps,
you will have to learn containers in depth.
For the CCNA however, you only need to understand
the very basics.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First we will review virtual machines.
Containers are a similar technology to virtual
machines so it’s important to understand
both so we can compare them.
Then we will look at containers.
You may have heard of Docker before, the most
famous container engine available.
Finally we will spend some time comparing
virtual machines and containers.
To begin, here’s an example of apps running
on a server without virtualization.
There is a single operating system, for example
Windows Server or Red Hat Linux, and on top
of that OS all of the apps are running.
The apps are not isolated.
A problem in one app could affect all of the
other apps.
Now, you could isolate them by buying a separate
physical server for each individual app, but
that is extremely cost-inefficient.
Virtual Machines are a solution to this problem.
Virtual Machines, VMs, allow multiple operating
systems to run on a single physical server,
and then apps are installed on those operating
systems.
A hypervisor is used to manage and allocate
hardware resources to each VM.
Remember, the VMs are all running on top of
the same physical hardware, so they need a
hypervisor to allocate those resources appropriately.
There are two main types of hypervisors, Type
1 hypervisors, also known as Native or bare-metal
hypervisors, run directly on top of hardware.
That is the top diagram, notice the Type 1
hypervisor directly on top of the hardware,
with each VM then running on top of the hypervisor.
Type 2 hypervisors, also known as Hosted hypervisors,
run on top of a Host OS, for example Windows
or perhaps macOS or some kind of Linux.
That is shown in the bottom diagram.
On top of the hardware there is a Host OS,
with the type 2 hypervisor and its VMs installed
on top of the host OS.
Type 1 hypervisors are widely used in data
center environments.
If an enterprise has servers installed in
a data center and is running its apps on VMs
in those servers, you can be sure those VMs
are running on a type 1 hypervisor.
Type 2 hypervisors, on the other hand, are
commonly used on personal devices.
For example, running a virtual network lab
on your PC using Cisco Modeling Labs, CML.
For my personal studies, I use CML to run
virtual labs.
Windows is installed on my PC hardware, I
run VMware Workstation, a Type 2 Hypervisor,
in Windows, and then CML runs as a VM in Workstation.
Note that the OS in each VM can be the same
or different.
If you are running multiple VMs, one can be
running Windows, the other Linux, and the
other macOS, that’s no problem.
The binaries and libraries that I have indicated
in gray in the diagrams are software libraries
and services needed by the Apps running in
each VM.
A VM allows its app or apps to run in an isolated
environment, separate from the apps in other
VMs.
If there is an issue with one app or one of
the guest OS’s, it’s not going to affect
the others.
And VMs are easy to create, delete, move,
etc.
For example a VM can be easily saved and moved
between different physical servers.
Here’s a very simple diagram to help you
visualize the difference between Type 1 and
Type 2 hypervisors.
Type 1 runs directly on hardware, and Type
2 runs on a Host OS.
Virtualization using VMs allows much more
efficient use of server hardware and VMs are
widely in use today.
However, containers are a more recent virtualization
technology being used more and more in recent
days.
Let’s move on to the main topic of today’s
video, containers, and then compare them to
VMs.
This diagram shows the basic architecture
of how containers run.
Containers are software packages that contain
an App and all dependencies, the binaries
and libraries in the diagram, for the contained
app to run.
Note that multiple apps can be run in a single
container, although this is not how containers
are usually used.
You can generally assume that one container
means one app.
Containers run on a Container Engine, for
example Docker Engine which is the most popular
one.
And that container engine is run on a host
OS, usually Linux, which runs on the hardware.
Containers are lightweight and include only
the dependencies required for the specific
app.
No need to run an OS in each container, unlike
in VMs.
That is the major difference between VMs and
containers; VMs run an OS in each VM, whereas
containers don’t.
All of the different costs and benefits of
VMs vs containers come from that major difference.
Now, a container orchestrator is a software
platform for automating the deployment, management,
scaling etc of containers.
For example you might have heard of Kubernetes,
which is the most popular container orchestrator.
Docker also has one called Docker Swarm.
Now, why would we need a container orchestrator?
Well, in small numbers manual operation of
containers is possible, but large-scale systems,
for example involving microservices, can require
thousands of containers.
That many containers cannot be realistically
managed manually.
Since I mentioned microservices, Microservice
Architecture is an approach to software architecture
that divides a larger solution into smaller
parts, called microservices.
So instead of one monolithic app, you might
have hundreds of different microservices running
together to form the larger solution.
And those microservices all run in containers
that can be orchestrated by Kubernetes or
another platform.
So, that’s a very quick overview of containers.
Now let’s compare VMs and containers.
As I mentioned before, these differences all
stem from the fact that each VM runs its own
OS, whereas containers all run on top of a
shared OS.
That major architectural difference has some
implications that make containers favored
in many cases these days.
First of all, VMs can take minutes to boot
up whereas containers can boot up in milliseconds.
This makes containers much more agile.
For example, if one container crashes it takes
very little time for another to boot up and
take over.
And VMs take up more disk space, often tens
of gigabytes, whereas containers usually only
take tens of megabytes.
Again, that stems from the fact that each
VM includes its own OS, whereas a container
only contains an app and its dependencies.
And for the same reason, VMs use more CPU
and RAM resources compared to containers.
Regarding portability, VMs are quite portable
and can move between physical systems running
the same hypervisor, but containers are even
more so.
They are smaller, faster to boot up, and Docker
containers can be run on nearly any container
service.
So, with these points containers are looking
much better than VMs, but VMs do have their
advantages.
One advantage is that VMs are more isolated
because each VM runs its own OS.
An issue on one OS won’t affect apps in
other VMs.
However that can’t be said for containers;
if the OS all containers run on top of crashes,
the containers are all affected.
Note that this isolation also provides security
benefits for VMs.
To summarize; there is a major movement toward
the use of containers, especially with the
rise of microservices, automation, and DevOps,
which is the combination of software development
and IT operations.
But VMs are still widely used today and they
aren’t going to go away any time soon.
The discussion of VMs versus containers has
been had many times online.
Do a search on Google or YouTube and you’ll
find lots of resources if you want to learn
more.
Here’s what we covered in this video.
First we briefly reviewed virtual machines,
and then we covered containers and compared
them with VMs.
Containers and VMs are similar but also different
in key ways.
There is, of course, a lot of depth to the
topic of containers, Docker, Kubernetes, etc.
For the CCNA you should just know the basics
I mentioned in this video, but if you’re
interested in learning more there are countless
resources available online.
Okay, let’s go to the quiz, here’s question
1.
SLIDE9
Identify the three components below that containers
run on top of.
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the three components are the hardware,
the OS which runs on top of the hardware,
and the container engine which runs on top
of the OS.
Then the containers all run on top of the
container engine.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following are examples of container
orchestrators?
(select two) Pause the video now to select
the answers.
Okay, the answers are B, Docker Swarm and
C, Kubernetes.
They are both popular container orchestration
platforms, although Kubernetes is definitely
the most popular.
Docker Engine is a container engine which
containers run on top of, it’s not an orchestrator.
And Hyper-V is a Type-1 hypervisor by Microsoft,
it’s not related to containers.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following statements about VMs
and containers are true? (select three) Pause
the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are A, C, and F. VMs require
more resources than containers because each
VM runs its own OS.
VMs are more isolated than containers, again
because each VM runs its own OS.
Containers, on the other hand, all run on
a host OS, with a container engine installed
on top of it.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz and this video.
I hope this video was helpful, thanks for
watching.