Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a complete course for the CCNA.
In this video we will cover Virtual Routing
and Forwarding, VRF.
VRF allows us to divide one physical router
into multiple virtual routers.
You can think of it like VLANs for routers.
VLANs divide a switch into multiple virtual
switches each with their own broadcast domain,
and VRF divides a router into multiple virtual
routers each with their own routing table.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I will introduce the concept of VRF
and its capabilities, and then introduce VRF
configuration.
Note that VRF configuration isn’t actually
a CCNA exam topic, but I think seeing the
configurations will help you understand how
it works.
Unfortunately VRF isn’t supported in Packet
Tracer, so if you want to try it in a lab
you’ll need to use something like Cisco
Modeling Labs, CML, or real Cisco devices.
Let’s get started.
The diagram at the bottom gives an idea of
how VRFs work.
The black box in the middle represents R1,
a single physical router.
The blue, green, and red router icons inside
represent three virtual routers inside R1,
three VRFs.
Let’s call them VRF1, VRF2, and VRF3.
So, Virtual Routing and Forwarding is used
to divide a single router into multiple virtual
routers.
This is similar to how VLANs are used to divide
a single switch, a LAN, into multiple virtual
switches, virtual LANs.
By default, all interfaces on a switch are
in the same LAN, the same broadcast domain.
When using VLANs, we can divide that one broadcast
domain into multiple virtual broadcast domains.
Similarly, by default all router interfaces
are all in the same ‘routing domain’.
By ‘routing domain’ I mean, by default
traffic received on one router interface can
be forwarded out of any other interface on
the router, if the routing table says to do
so.
For example, without using VRF, in the diagram
below traffic received on R1’s G0/0 interface
can be routed to and forwarded out of R1’s
G1/2 interface.
However, with VRF that won’t be possible.
G0/0 is in VRF1 and G1/2 is in VRF3, so traffic
cannot be forwarded between them.
How does VRF accomplish this?
It does this allowing a router to build separate
routing tables.
Normally a router has one routing table, but
with VRF it has multiple.
Interfaces, specifically layer 3 interfaces,
are configured to be in a specific VRF, also
known as a VRF Instance.
Keep in mind that VRF does not apply to Layer
2 interfaces on a switch.
Only router interfaces, SVIs, and routed ports
on multilayer switches can be configured in
a VRF.
It’s a Layer 3 concept.
As I mentioned before, traffic in one VRF
cannot be forwarded out of an interface in
another VRF.
However, as an exception VRF Leaking can be
configured to allow traffic to pass between
VRFs.
That is a more advanced concept though and
I won’t cover it in this video.
So, what is the main purpose of VRF?
Well VRF is commonly used to facilitate MPLS,
multi-protocol label switching.
However, that’s actually not the kind of
VRF we are talking about here.
The kind of VRF we are talking about is VRF-lite,
VRF without MPLS.
So, keep in mind that when I say ‘VRF’
in this video, I’m really referring to ‘VRF-lite’.
VRF is commonly used by service providers
to allow one device to carry traffic from
multiple customers.
How does it help with that?
Well, there are two main points.
First, each customer’s traffic is isolated
from the others, because each customer connects
to their own virtual router within the service
provider’s physical router.
In the diagram below, let’s say the blue,
green, and red devices represent three different
customers.
All customers connect to the same service
provider router, R1, but each connects to
a different virtual router, a different VRF
instance.
And another major point is that customer IP
addresses can overlap without issues.
For example, the blue customer uses subnets
192.168.1.0/24 and 192.168.2.0/24.
The green customer also uses 192.168.1.0/24
and 2.0/24.
And so does the red customer.
Without VRF, this kind of configuration is
not possible on a router.
But with VRF, it works fine even though the
IP addresses all overlap.
Okay, now let’s try configuring VRF to help
understand how it works.
To demonstrate VRF configuration I’ll use
the network below.
SPR1 is a service provider router providing
WAN services to two customers, Customer 1
and Customer 2.
C1R1 and C1R2 belong to Customer 1 and C2R1
and C2R2 belong to customer 2.
Note the subnets being used.
Both Customer 1 and Customer 2 use subnet
192.168.1.0/30.
First, let’s see what happens when we try
to configure this without using VRF.
First I configured SPR1’s G0/0 and G0/1,
both connected to Customer 1’s routers.
No problems yet.
But when I try to configure G0/2, I get an
error message, 192.168.1.0 overlaps with G0/0.
G0/2 cannot use IP address 192.168.1.1 because
it is in the same subnet as G0/0.
In this case it’s the exact same IP address,
but even if the IP address is different it
won’t work.
Let me demonstrate that.
To prove that point I tried to configure it
as 192.168.1.2, but again it didn’t work.
Even if the IP address is different, G0/2
cannot be configured in the same subnet as
G0/0.
So, without the use of VRF, two interfaces
on the same router cannot be in the same subnet.
Next let’s use VRF to configure this network
properly.
First we have to create the VRFs, which can
be done in global config mode with the command
IP VRF, followed by the VRF name.
Here I created two VRFs, one named CUSTOMER1
and the other CUSTOMER2.
I then used the command SHOW IP VRF which
shows all of the VRFs on the router.
As you can see, the CUSTOMER1 and CUSTOMER2
VRFs were created.
The next step is to assign interfaces to each
VRF.
So, from interface config mode for G0/0 I
used the command IP VRF FORWARDING CUSTOMER1.
G0/0 is now part of the CUSTOMER1 VRF, however
I also got this message.
Interface G0/0 IPv4 disabled and addresses
removed due to enabling VRF CUSTOMER1.
If an interface has an IP address configured,
the IP address will be removed when you assign
the interface to a VRF.
So, I then re-configured the IP address, 192.168.1.1/30.
I then configured G0/1.
Again, the IP address I configured before
was removed when I assigned it to the VRF,
so I had to re-configure it.
I then configured the G0/2 interface.
Note that this time it worked, I was able
to configure G0/2 as 192.168.1.1/30 even though
it overlaps with G0/0.
That’s because they are in separate VRFs.
I then configured G0/3 as well.
I then once again confirmed the VRFs and now
you can see the interfaces listed in the output.
So, SPR1 is now divided into two separate
virtual routers: the CUSTOMER1 VRF, which
includes G0/0 and G0/1, and the CUSTOMER2
VRF, which includes G0/2 and G0/3.
So, basic configuration of VRF-lite is simple:
create VRFs with the IP VRF command, and then
assign interfaces to VRFs with the IP VRF
FORWARDING command.
There is of course a lot more depth to VRFs,
but that’s all we’ll look at for now.
I then used SHOW IP ROUTE on SPR1, but I don’t
see any routes.
Usually you’d expect to see connected and
local routes after configuring IP addresses
on interfaces, so why is nothing displayed
here?
SHOW IP ROUTE displays the ‘global routing
table’, that’s the normal routing table
you’re used to when not using VRFs.
In this case, all of SPR1’s interfaces are
configured in VRFs, so nothing displays here.
By the way, you can have a mix of interfaces
using and not using VRFs.
So, I then used the command SHOW IP ROUTE
VRF CUSTOMER1, and now we can see some routes,
the connected and local routes for G0/0 and
G0/1.
So, if you want to see a VRF’s routing table
you have to add VRF and the VRF’s name to
the end of the command.
Here I viewed the CUSTOMER2 VRF’s routing
table.
So, these are separate routing tables from
each other and from the global routing table.
By the way, if an interface is not in a VRF
its routes will appear in the global routing
table, and it will be isolated from the interfaces
in VRFs, just like interfaces in different
VRFs are isolated from each other.
To test reachability, I tried some pings from
SPR1.
I first pinged 192.168.1.2, but all the pings
failed.
Why is that?
It’s because, in the global routing table,
there are no routes.
As I showed in the previous slide, the global
routing table is empty.
You can specify the VRF when pinging like
this, PING VRF, the VRF name, and then the
destination.
This time the pings worked.
Which device was SPR1 pinging in this case?
There are two devices with the IP address
192.168.1.2; C1R1 and C2R1, but in this case
SPR1 was pinging C1R1 because I specified
the CUSTOMER1 VRF.
In the CUSTOMER1 VRF again I pinged 192.168.11.2,
C1R2, which worked, and then 192.168.12.2,
C2R2, which didn’t work.
That’s because, in the CUSTOMER1 VRF’s
routing table, there is no route to the destination
.12.2.
This time I pinged 192.168.1.2 and specified
the CUSTOMER2 VRF.
Who is SPR1 pinging this time?
C2R1, connected to G0/2 in the CUSTOMER2 VRF.
And I pinged 192.168.12.2, C2R2, which worked
this time because I pinged in the proper VRF.
So, to sum it up, hosts in the same VRF can
communicate with each other, and hosts in
different VRFs can’t.
SPR1 was divided into two separate virtual
routers.
Here’s what we covered in this video.
I introduced VRFs and showed the basics of
how they are configured in Cisco IOS.
But remember, what we mentioned in this video
is more accurately called ‘VRF-lite’,
which means we’re not using VRF with MPLS.
VRF is used to split a router up into multiple
virtual routers, each with their own routing
table.
Service providers can use VRFs to allow multiple
customers to connect to the same infrastructure
while still allowing their traffic to be isolated.
Plus, it doesn’t matter if customers use
the same IP addresses in their networks, because
each VRF is a separate routing table.
For the CCNA, it’s enough to just understand
the basic purpose of VRF, but if you go further
to study at the CCNP level and beyond you’ll
definitely have to study VRF in more depth.
Okay, let’s go to the quiz, here’s question
1.
You issue the following commands on R1’s
G0/0 interface.
However, after issuing show ip interface brief
you notice that G0/0 does not have an IP address.
Why is that?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is B, the IP address was
removed by the IP VRF FORWARDING VRF1 command.
As I showed earlier, if an interface already
has an IP address, that IP address will be
removed when you assign it to a VRF.
You will then have to re-configure the IP
address.
So, if you’re planning to use VRFs you should
configure the interface IP addresses after
assigning them to VRFs.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Examine the network below.
If you issue the command ping 192.168.1.10
on R1, which device will respond?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, no device will respond.
Actually, R1 won’t be able to even send
the pings.
All of R1’s interfaces are assigned to VRFs,
and a ping without specifying a VRF will use
the global routing table.
None of R1’s interfaces are using the global
routing instance, so the routing table will
be empty and it won’t be able to send the
pings.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following statements about VLANs
and VRFs are true? (select three).
Pause the video now to select your answers.
Okay, the answers are C, D, and F. VRFs divide
routers up by creating separate routing tables.
In effect, you are dividing the router into
separate virtual routers.
VLANs, on the other hand, divide switches
up by creating separate broadcast domains.
And router interfaces in different VRFs can
have the same IP address, as I demonstrated
in this video.
A is incorrect because VRFs do not create
separate broadcast domains.
Router interfaces are already in separate
broadcast domains anyway, without VRFs.
B is wrong because VLANs do not create separate
MAC address tables, even when using VLANs
the switch still keeps one MAC address table.
And E is wrong because VRFs can also be configured
on the SVIs and routed ports of multilayer
switches, not just on routers.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz and this video.
I hope it was helpful, thanks for watching.