Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
This lab will, once again, be different than
most of the labs in this course.
Instead of configuring network devices, we
will download a free Type 2 hypervisor, Oracle
VirtualBox, and then run a Linux virtual machine
on it.
First up, let me say that this lab is not
necessary for the CCNA.
For the CCNA exam you should know the basics
of virtualization I showed you in the lecture
video, but you don’t have to know how to
set up a virtual machine.
So, why am I including this lab in the course
if it’s not necessary?
There are three main reasons.
First, I think getting hands-on experience
will help you understand some of the concepts
you have learned.
In this case, you’ll see how a type 2 hypervisor,
VirtualBox, runs on top of a host OS, windows
in my case.
And then you’ll see how a guest OS, Ubuntu
in this case, runs on top of the hypervisor.
The second reason is that it’s actually
quite simple to set up a VM on a Type 2 hypervisor,
so I want to show you that you can easily
do it without being a virtualization specialist.
And the third reason is that it’s a good
idea to have a type 2 hypervisor, whether
that’s virtualbox or another one such as
VMware workstation, for your future studies.
For example, when I use GNS3 to run virtual
Cisco routers and switches, I run a GNS3 VM
in a type 2 hypervisor, VMware workstation.
However, if for any reason you are unable
to complete this lab, for example if your
PC doesn’t have sufficient specifications
to run a VM, don’t worry about it.
Just watch the video, and then continue to
the next part of the course.
Okay let’s get right into it.
To get VirtualBox, go to virtualbox.org and
click here where it says download virtualbox.
Now, throughout this video I am going to assume
that you are using a Windows PC.
Of course, I’m sure some of your use macOS
and some of you run Linux.
In that case, you should download the appropriate
version of VirtualBox.
I will be downloading VirtualBox for Windows,
so I will click here, windows hosts.
VirtualBox will be downloaded, so let’s
open it and install it.
I will use the default settings so let’s
just click next, and next, and next, click
YES here, and click install.
Allow it to make changes, and then virtualbox
will be installed.
It’s not a very long installation, but I
will cut the video here and return when it
has finished.
Okay the installation has finished so I will
click on Finish and open virtualbox.
Here is virtual box.
Now, to add a Linux VM we first need to download
Linux.
Now, Linux isn’t actually an operating system,
it’s a family of operating systems that
use the Linux kernel.
Each operating system is often called a linux
distribution, or distro.
For this video I’ve decided to use the Ubuntu
distro.
So, go to Ubuntu.com, click on download, and
click on the LTS, long term support, version.
This is a fairly large file so I downloaded
it beforehand.
So let’s return to virtualbox, and I’ll
click on New here to add a new VM.
First we can set a name.
I’ll name it Ubuntu 20.04, since that’s
the version of Ubuntu I downloaded.
Notice that it automatically selected the
type, Linux, and version, Ubuntu, when I entered
the name.
So, I’ll click next.
Now we have to select how much memory to allocate
to the VM.
My PC has 16 gigs, and the recommendation
for this Ubuntu VM is 1 gig.
I want to keep this video as simple as possible
so I’ll leave it at 1, but if I actually
wanted to use this VM I’d probably assign
it a bit more than that.
Okay, I’ll click on next.
Now the hard disk, I’ll click on ‘create’
to create a virtual hard disk for this VM
to use.
I’ll use the default hard disk file type,
so I’ll click next.
You can then select a dynamically allocated
or fixed size hard disk.
You can read the difference here, but I’ll
stick with the default and click next.
Now the size, I’ll leave it at the default
10 gigs and click create.
Okay, the VM has been created but there is
one more important step.
Click on settings here to edit this VM.
Then storage, and click on this empty disk
here.
Basically, we are going to insert an Ubuntu
disk into this virtual computer, so that we
can install the Ubuntu OS when it boots up.
So, click on the blue disk here on the right,
click choose a disk file, and then select
the ubuntu .iso file you just downloaded.
Now I’ll click OK.
Okay, we are ready to boot the VM, so I’ll
click on start.
The VM will boot up, and we will go through
the Ubuntu installation process.
This will take some time so I will cut the
video whenever we have to wait for something
to load or install.
Okay, we are greeted with the Ubuntu installation
wizard.
I’ll click on install ubuntu.
I’ll click on continue to use the US english
keyboard layout.
Just to speed up the installation, here I’ll
click on minimal installation and disable
the ‘download updates while installing ubuntu’
option.
I won’t actually be using this VM, so this
is fine for me.
Now I’ll click continue.
Here it says the computer currently has no
detected operating systems, which is expected,
so I’ll leave this selected to erase the
disk and install Ubuntu, and click install
now.
And click continue here.
I’m in Japan so I’ll leave this as is
and click continue.
Finally we have to register our information
and a user.
I’ll enter my name and username, and a password,
I’ll just make it cisco even though that’s
a weak password.
And then click on continue.
Okay, now Ubuntu will be installed.
This can take some time so I will once again
cut the video here until it’s finished.
After the installation is complete you will
be asked to restart the VM, and when you see
this screen just press enter.
And now our Ubuntu is up and running.
So, I have Windows running on top of my PC
hardware, virtual box running on top of Windows,
and Ubuntu running on top of virtual box.
I’ll end the lab here.
If you don’t plan to use this VM you can
simply delete it.
But you could also keep it and use the VM
to get familiar with Linux, which is a valuable
skill for anyone in IT.
But that’s up to you.
So, in this lab we installed a type 2 hypervisor,
oracle virtualbox, and then installed a VM
on top of it.
That’s all for this lab.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Apogee, Meir, Pietrocious, Joseph,
Dragos, Tanvir, Charlesetta, Gerrard, Tom,
Samil, Scott, Martin, Tebogo, Pavel, Abraham,
Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Suki, Kenneth, Seamus,
Brandon, Marcel, Kone, Donald, Gustavo, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Ed, John, Funnydart,
Velvijaykum, Boson Software, Devin, Yonatan,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, August 3rd
2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.