Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will look at wireless LAN
configuration.
In the past three videos we covered a lot
of theory about wireless networks.
Finally we’ll get hands-on and see how to
actually build a wireless LAN.
We will cover exam topics 2.7, 2.8, and 2.9.
2.9 in particular tells us what we need to
be able to configure for the CCNA exam.
In addition, we will cover exam topic 5.10
which tells us we need to configure WLANs
using WPA2 PSK, pre-shared key, using the
GUI.
Note that both topics 2.9 and 5.10 mention
that we must use the GUI, graphical user interface.
Up to this point in the course we have only
been using the CLI, command line interface,
to configure devices.
You can configure wireless LANs via the CLI
too, but it’s much more common to use the
GUI, and that’s what Cisco expects you to
know for the exam.
Here’s what we’ll cover.
First I’ll give an introduction to the network
topology I’ll be using for today’s demonstration.
Then I’ll cover the necessary switch configurations,
since we’ll be connecting all devices to
one central switch.
Then I’ll show the basic wireless LAN controller
setup, so we will be able to access its GUI
and do the configurations you need to know
for the CCNA.
Then I’ll show how to configure the WLC’s
interfaces, and then we’ll configure some
wireless LANs.
Finally I’ll take a look at some additional
features on the WLC.
There’s a lot to explore in the WLC and
you only need to know the basics, so I’ll
just point out a few features you might want
to be aware of.
As always, watch until the end of the video
for a bonus practice question from Boson software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
For the first time in this course, I will
be using a physical lab.
You can’t make a wireless lab with virtual
devices alone.
With that said, a partially virtual lab is
possible.
I could have, for example, used a virtual
WLC instead of a physical one, but I was able
to get this hardware second hand for a cheap
price, so I decided to use all physical devices.
Fortunately, you don’t have to purchase
physical hardware to practice wireless configuration
for the CCNA.
Packet Tracer does offer some basic WLC and
AP functionality.
It’s limited, but it’s good enough to
practice what you need for the CCNA.
Anyway, in this topology I have one switch,
one wireless LAN controller, and two wireless
APs.
By the way, I haven’t connected any power
cables to the APs, but they are still receiving
power.
Can you guess how they are receiving power
without a dedicated power cable?
The answer is PoE of course, power over ethernet.
A single ethernet cable is used to both pass
data and provide power to the device.
You can see here on the switch that its interfaces
are PoE capable.
Actually, the WLC itself also has two PoE
capable ports, although I’m not using them
in this lab.
So, an AP could be directly connected to the
WLC itself and receive power via PoE.
Here’s the network topology.
Note that the WLC connects to the switch via
a LAG, link aggregation group.
You might remember from my EtherChannel video
that LAG is just another term for EtherChannel.
But in the context of wireless LAN controllers,
we always use the term LAG.
And also note that WLCs only support static
LAG, no PAgP or LACP.
So, when we configure the switch’s interfaces
to form the LAG we will use the command CHANNEL-GROUP
1 MODE ON, not MODE ACTIVE or MORE DESIRABLE.
You don’t have to connect the WLC to the
switch using a LAG, but it’s a good idea
to provide additional throughput and redundancy.
I will use three VLANs, three subnets, in
this network.
VLAN10 is the management VLAN, its subnet
will be 192.168.1.0/24.
VLAN 100 will be called ‘Internal’, its
subnet will be 10.0.0.0/24.
And VLAN 200 will be called ‘Guest’.
Its subnet will be 10.1.0.0/24.
Note that only VLAN 100 and VLAN 200 will
be mapped to a wireless LAN and advertised
by the APs.
VLAN 10 will just be used for connecting to
the network devices, the WLC, switch, and
APs, and managing them for example via their
CLI with an SSH connection.
VLAN100 will be mapped to an SSID, Internal,
which the APs will advertise and clients can
connect to.
Same for VLAN200.
It will be mapped to an SSID called Guest
and advertised by the APs.
Devices will be able to associate with that
SSID too.
Now, in this video I won’t be doing any
advanced policies to control traffic, but
in a real deployment you could limit the Guest
SSID to Internet access only, whereas clients
associated with the Internal SSID could access
all internal company resources, for example.
The switch will have an SVI in each VLAN,
the .1 address of each subnet.
And the WLC will have an IP address in each
VLAN too, the .100 of each subnet.
The APs will need an IP address in the management
VLAN so they can communicate with the WLC,
but they will get their IP addresses via DHCP.
So, where’s the DHCP server?
The WLC could be the server, but I’ll configure
the switch as both a DHCP server and an NTP
server for this network.
I want to remind you that, since we’re using
a WLC, a split-MAC deployment, the switch’s
interfaces connecting to the APs are access
ports.
Only the WLC needs to connect via a trunk
port with all of the necessary VLANs.
However the APs will form CAPWAP tunnels to
the WLC.
So, let’s say this client associated with
the Internal WLAN wants to communicate with
its default gateway, which is SW1’s VLAN
100 SVI.
The traffic passes through the CAPWAP tunnel
to the WLC.
On the WLC, the Internal WLAN is mapped to
VLAN100, so it will forward the traffic in
VLAN100 to SW1.
SW1 then sends it back via the same path.
What if the client associated with the Internal
WLAN wants to send traffic to the client associated
with the Guest WLAN?
It will send the traffic to its default gateway,
SW1, following the same path as before.
SW1 routes it to VLAN 200 and sends it to
the WLC, which will send it to the destination
client via the CAPWAP tunnel and the AP.
So, that’s just a quick review of how traffic
travels in a split-MAC deployment like this.
So, let’s finally start our configurations,
first SW1.
All of these configurations will be review
for you, so let’s just quickly take a look
at them.
Here’s the first half of the configurations.
First I created the three VLANs, 10, 100,
and 200, and gave them appropriate names.
Then I configured fastethernet 0/6, 7, and
8 as access ports in VLAN10.
F0/7 and 8 connect to the APs, so why do you
think I configured F0/6 too?
It’s because I will later connect my PC
to F0/6 to gain access to WLC1’s GUI.
A device’s CLI, command line interface,
can be accessed via the console port, or connected
to over the network using Telnet or SSH.
However, the GUI, graphical user interface,
cannot be accessed via the console port.
You must connect over the network, using HTTP
or HTTPS.
I’ll show you how to do that when I move
on to configure the WLC.
Anyway, I then configured SW1’s F0/1 and
F0/2 as a static LAG, static etherchannel.
Remember that WLCs only support static LAG,
no PAgP or LACP.
So, you must use the command CHANNEL-GROUP
1 MODE ON, not MODE DESIRABLE or MODE ACTIVE.
And finally I configured the port-channel
interface as a trunk and allowed VLANs 10,
100, and 200.
And here’s the second half of the configurations.
I configured an SVI for each VLAN.
These will be used as the default gateway
for their subnets.
I then configured a DHCP pool for each VLAN,
and notice that I used the DEFAULT-ROUTER
command and specified SW1’s SVI IP addresses
as the default gateway for each subnet.
The VLAN10 DHCP pool will be used by the APs
to get their IP addresses, which they need
to communicate with the WLC.
Note that the VLAN10 pool has an additional
command, OPTION 43 IP 192.168.1.100.
DHCP option 43 can be used to tell the APs
the IP address of their WLC.
So, when the APs get an IP address from SW1,
it will tell them ‘your WLC is at IP address
192.168.1.100’, and the APs will then try
to communicate with the WLC and form their
CAPWAP tunnels.
Although in this case it’s actually not
necessary.
The APs and WLC are in the same subnet, the
same local VLAN, and APs will send broadcast
CAPWAP discovery messages to check if there
are any WLCs in the local subnet.
The WLC will hear those broadcast messages,
so the APs will be able to join the WLC.
But just be aware that DHCP option 43 might
be necessary if the WLC is located somewhere
that it won’t be able to hear the broadcast
discovery messages from the APs.
Remember that one for the exam, DHCP option
43.
So, that’s the VLAN 10 pool.
The VLAN 100 and VLAN 200 pools will be used
by wireless clients.
SW1 will assign IP addresses to them using
DHCP.
Okay, the final command I used on the switch
is NTP MASTER.
This will make it an NTP server, and I’ll
later tell the WLC to use SW1 as its NTP server.
Okay, that’s all of the configuration needed
on SW1.
Now let’s finally configure the WLC.
I can’t connect to its GUI yet.
First I need to connect to its console port
and do some basic setup in the CLI.
So, let’s take a look at that.
When the WLC first boots up you will be greeted
with a configuration wizard.
So, you don’t actually need to know any
CLI commands for the WLC to do this basic
setup, the wizard will walk you through it.
First, it asks me if I would like to terminate
autoinstall.
Autoinstall can be used to automatically download
the WLC’s configuration from a TFTP server.
I won’t do that, so I press enter to skip
it.
Note that the value in the square brackets,
yes in this case, is the default.
You don’t have to type yes, if you just
hit enter it will assume ‘yes’.
Then I entered the system name, the host name,
of WLC1, as well as a username and password
that I will use later to log in to the device.
It then asks me if I want to enable link aggregation,
LAG.
Notice that there are two options in square
brackets, yes and NO.
However, NO is in upper case letters, so it
is the default.
If I just hit enter, the device will assume
I mean NO, I don’t want to enable LAG.
However in this case I will be using a LAG
to connect to the switch, so I selected yes.
Then I enter some values for the management
interface.
Note that this isn’t a physical interface,
a physical port.
It is a virtual interface in the WLC.
I gave it an IP of 192.168.1.100, a /24 netmask,
specified SW1’s IP address of .1 as the
default gateway, gave it a VLAN ID of 10,
and again specified SW1’s IP address of
.1 as the DHCP server.
Let’s continue with the WLC’s basic setup.
This is still part of the configuration wizard,
so I’m answering questions instead of actually
inputting commands in the CLI.
These three options at the top are a bit beyond
what you need to know for the CCNA, but let
me briefly explain them.
The virtual gateway IP is an IP address used
when the WLC is communicating directly with
wireless clients such as when relaying DHCP
requests.
The multicast IP address is used when forwarding
traffic to its APs.
Note that I selected an IP address in the
class D range, which is reserved for multicast
addresses.
And the mobility/RF group name is used when
you have multiple WLCs and you want them to
work together.
I doubt you’ll be asked about these on the
CCNA exam.
Next in the setup it asks us to configure
a wireless LAN, starting with the SSID.
I’ll show you how to do this in the GUI
soon, but first it requires us to make one
in this configuration wizard.
I use the SSID internal, and then I accept
the default settings for the next question
about DHCP bridging mode, leaving it disabled.
For wireless clients’ DHCP requests to reach
the DHCP server, SW1, they must pass through
WLC1 first.
If DHCP bridging mode is enabled, the WLC
becomes totally transparent to the clients.
It will appear as if they are communicating
directly to the server.
But that’s not necessary here, so I’ll
leave it disabled.
I also accept the default for the next setting,
allow static IP addresses.
This means that clients are allowed to use
static IP addresses if they prefer.
They don’t have to use DHCP.
And finally I choose not to configure a RADIUS
server now, and it gives me a warning.
The default WLAN security policy requires
a RADIUS server.
We will change the WLAN security policy to
use a pre-shared key, so we don’t need to
configure a RADIUS server.
Next I have to enter a country code, or a
list of country codes, and I entered FR for
France.
Why did I select France?
This is actually very important and was a
problem for me when getting this lab set up.
Because I live in Japan, I originally entered
JP here, but then my APs weren’t able to
join with the WLC.
Here is the reason for that.
Look at the model name of this AP here.
Specifically, this E in the model name.
This E indicates the regulatory domain of
the device, E meaning Europe.
If the regulatory domain of the country specified
in the WLC configuration doesn’t match the
regulatory domain of the AP, the AP won’t
be able to join the WLC.
You can check the regulatory domain of each
country here.
In Canada or the US, for example, -A is used
instead of -E. So, because my APs are -E,
I configured a country in Europe on my WLC.
I doubt that you have to know this for the
CCNA exam, but if you have your own wireless
lab with second-hand devices, you should be
aware of this or you might run into problems.
Okay, here’s the final section of the initial
WLC setup.
I choose to enable 802.11b, a, and g, as well
as auto-RF which allows the WLC to automatically
select which channels to use and how much
transmit power to use.
This is much better than doing everything
manually.
I then configure some NTP settings so my WLC
has the correct time.
Finally I save the settings, and the device
resets.
That’s all for the WLC initial setup.
So, now that the WLC’s initial setup is
complete it has an IP address in the management
VLAN, VLAN 10.
So, instead of connecting my PC to the WLC’s
console port and using the CLI, I will connect
my PC to the switch.
Remember, I configured SW1’s F0/6 interface
in VLAN10, the management VLAN.
Now I will be able to use HTTP or HTTPS to
access the WLC’s GUI in a web browser.
So, I enter WLC1’s IP address, 192.168.1.100,
in a web browser.
However I get a warning that my connection
is not private.
The error is certificate authority invalid.
This just means my PC doesn’t trust the
certificate on my WLC.
But that’s not an issue.
Next I clicked on advanced here.
And now I get the option to proceed to 192.168.1.100.
If your browser gives you a warning like this
when visiting a website you should be careful,
but I know that I’m just connecting to WLC1
on my local network, so there’s no issue
here.
And here is the login screen for the Cisco
WLC.
So, I click on the login button.
And then I enter the admin username and password
I created in the initial setup earlier.
And here is the dashboard for the WLC.
Let me point out a few things.
Notice that it shows which interfaces are
up, the green ones, and which are down, the
red ones.
Those two green interfaces are forming a LAG
and are connected to the switch.
Here there is a summary of some information
about the controller, such as its management
IP, system name, up time, temperature, CPU
and memory usage, etc.
And here is a summary of the access points
that have joined the WLC.
Note that both of my APs have already joined.
Okay, now let’s actually do some configurations
on the WLC.
First, I’ll go to the CONTROLLER tab up
top here.
From the controller tab, I clicked on interfaces,
and here you can see the WLC’s interfaces.
Note that these are not physical ports, but
logical or virtual interfaces in the WLC.
In most contexts we can use the terms port
and interface interchangeably.
However, in the context of WLCs, port means
physical port and interface means logical
interface within the device
Before configuring the interfaces, let me
briefly explain the ports and interfaces of
a WLC.
Again, WLC ports are the physical interfaces
that cables connect to.
And interfaces are the logical interfaces
within the WLC, like SVIs on a switch.
WLCs have a few different kinds of ports,
let me introduce them.
The service port is a dedicated management
port, it is used for out-of-band management.
That means keeping management traffic totally
separate from regular data traffic, not using
the same physical interface.
My WLC doesn’t have a dedicated service
port, so the management traffic will use the
same physical ports as the regular data traffic.
Note that the service port must connect to
a switch access port because it only supports
one VLAN.
Also this port can be used to connect to the
device while it is booting up, perform system
recovery, and other system management tasks
like that.
Next are distribution system ports.
These are the standard network interfaces
that connect to the distribution system, remember
that’s the 802.11 term for the wired network.
And these are the interfaces that are used
for regular data traffic to and from the wireless
clients.
Note that these ports usually connect to switch
trunk ports, and if multiple distribution
ports are used they can form a LAG, as I did
in my network.
Then there is the console port, which can
be either RJ45 or USB, or perhaps the WLC
has both.
And there might also be a redundancy port,
which can be used to connect to another WLC
to form a high availability, HA, pair.
This means you have redundant WLCs, so if
one fails the other one can continue to support
the network.
My WLC is a bit old, so it just has an RJ45
console port and four distribution system
ports.
These aren’t ports but it has a reset button
and some status LEDs on the front as well.
To show you the other kinds of ports, let’s
look at a more modern WLC from Cisco.
So, here is a pair of WLCs, let’s go through
each of these numbers, from 1 to 9.
Number 1 is the service port.
Again, this can be used for out-of-band management,
to keep the management traffic physically
separate from the data traffic.
Number 2 is an RJ45 console port, and number
3 is a USB console port.
Then there is another USB port.
This isn’t a network port, it’s just a
regular USB port used to transfer files to
the WLC, for example a new OS version to update
the software.
Next, number five is a distribution system
port, and it supports multi-gigabit speeds,
beyond 1-gig.
And then four more distribution system ports,
these ones are regular 1-gig ports.
Number 7 isn’t a port, it’s a reset button
like on my WLC, and there are status LEDs
too indicating the status of the device, those
are number 8 on this image.
And finally number 9 is the redundancy port.
You could connect these two WLCs by their
redundancy ports and they would form a redundant
pair.
Okay, those are the different kinds of physical
WLC ports.
WLCs have a few different kinds of interfaces,
too.
The management interface is used for so-called
management traffic, meaning communications
used to manage devices such as Telnet or SSH
connections to the CLI, HTTP or HTTPS connections
to the GUI, RADIUS authentication traffic,
NTP and Syslog traffic, etc.
Remember that, to connect to the GUI of the
WLC, I accessed the management IP address
of 192.168.1.100.
CAPWAP tunnels between the APs and WLC are
also formed to and from this interface.
Next there also might be a redundancy management
interface.
When two WLCs are connected by their redundancy
ports, one WLC becomes active and the other
becomes standby.
To manage the active WLC you can connect to
the management interface, but to manage the
standby WLC you can use the redundancy management
interface.
Next there is the virtual interface.
Remember I had to configure this IP address
when initially setting up the WLC?
It’s used when communicating with wireless
clients to relay DHCP requests, perform client
web authentication if necessary, etc.
Next there is a service port interface.
If the WLC’s service port is used, this
interface is bound to it and used for out-of-band
management instead of the regular management
interface.
And finally there are dynamic interfaces,
these are used to map a wireless LAN to a
VLAN.
For example, traffic from the internal wireless
LAN will be sent to the wired network from
the WLC’s Internal dynamic interface.
So, let’s go back to the GUI and configure
a couple dynamic interfaces to be used for
our wireless LANs.
Here’s the interfaces menu again.
I’ll click New to create a new interface.
First I’ll make the interface for the Internal
WLAN, and notice I’m mapping it to VLAN
100.
Then I’ll click on Apply.
I am then brought to this screen where I can
enter more details.
The VLAN ID was already set to 100 from the
previous screen, but I entered the IP address,
netmask, gateway, and DHCP server address.
That’s all I need to enter here, so I clicked
on Apply.
By the way, feel free to pause the video at
any point if you want to take a look at the
different settings available in any of these
menus.
So, now the dynamic interface called ‘internal’
has been created.
I will map this interface to the Internal
WLAN later, but now I have to create one more
interface.
That is the guest interface, so I click on
New again.
and then at this screen I specify a name of
Guest and I map it to VLAN 200, since that
will be used for the guest WLAN and VLAN.
Then I click apply.
Again at this screen I enter the IP information
needed for the Guest interface, the IP address,
netmask, gateway, and DHCP server address,
and then click apply to finish creating this
interface.
Okay, now the WLC has all of the interfaces
it needs.
Finally let’s go to configuring some WLANs.
To do that, just click on the WLAN tab here
at the top of the GUI.
So, here’s the WLANs tab.
Note that one WLAN, Internal, already exists.
That is because I made it during the initial
setup in the CLI.
However, I still have to make some changes
to this one.
For example, look at the security policies
column on the right.
It is configured to use 802.1X authentication,
so WPA enterprise mode.
But for the CCNA we have to configure Pre-shared
key authentication, in others words WPA personal
mode.
So, if I click on the WLAN ID, the number
1 on the left, I am able to edit this WLAN.
The profile name is Internal, it’s a WLAN,
the SSID is internal, and it’s enabled.
That all looks good.
Here’s the security policy.
As I said before I’ll have to change that,
but it’s done on the security tab, not here.
Now, here’s a problem.
Currently the Internal WLAN is mapped to the
management interface.
That’s not correct, we should map it to
the Internal dynamic interface.
So, that’s what I did.
I selected the Internal interface here.
Now it’s time to go to the security tab
and change that security policy to use a PSK
instead of 802.1X.
Here’s the security tab.
First up, notice what’s called the ‘layer
2 security’ setting.
This is where we can select things like WEP,
802.1X, different versions of WPA, etc.
Currently it’s WPA+WPA2, which is what we
should select for the CCNA.
For your reference, here are the layer 2 security
options available on my WLC.
Note that the newer WPA3 isn’t supported.
But that’s fine, we’re supposed to use
WPA2 for the CCNA.
Next, look down here at authentication key
management.
802.1X is selected.
This is what we want to change, it should
be PSK.
So, I scrolled down a bit, de-selected 802.1X,
and selected PSK, pre-shared key, instead.
Notice that the PSK can then be specified
either in ASCII or in HEX.
HEX means hexadecimal, the same number system
we learned for MAC addresses and IPv6 addresses.
ASCII means American Standard Code for Information
Interchange.
Basically, it means you can enter your password
using regular letters, numbers, and symbols.
So, I selected ASCII, entered a short password,
clicked on apply, and then I got an error
message, stating that the PSK in ASCII format
should be at least 8 characters in length.
This is to make sure the password is secure,
not easy to crack.
So this time I entered a longer password,
clicked on apply, and it worked.
We won’t configure any ‘Layer 3’ security
methods, but for your reference I checked
the Layer 3 tab and you can see that my WLC
supports something called Web Policy.
If I select web policy, various options appear,
such as web authentication and passthrough.
Web authentication means that, after wireless
clients get an IP address and try to access
a web page, they will have to enter a username
and password to authenticate.
Web passthrough is similar, but no username
or password are required.
Instead a warning or statement is displayed
and the client just has to agree to gain access
to the Internet.
In either of these examples, the Layer 2 authentication
can just be open.
This is common for public WiFi for example
at a cafe.
Note that the conditional and splash page
web redirect options are similar, but additionally
require 802.1X layer 2 authentication.
Anyway, as I said before we won’t configure
any of these, so let’s move on without enabling
web policy.
There is also a AAA servers tab, but since
we are using PSK authentication only there’s
no need to set up anything like a RADIUS server.
So, let’s go to the QoS tab now.
Here’s the QoS tab.
The only thing you need to be aware of here
is the QoS setting, which is Silver, best
effort, by default.
Here are the options available.
This is how you can control what quality of
service is provided to the wireless clients.
Platinum should be used for voice, for example
WiFi IP phones.
Gold should be used for video traffic.
Silver is the default, and bronze is given
the lowest priority, for what’s called ‘background’
traffic.
Anyway, in this case I’ll just leave it
at silver, but for the exam definitely know
these four QoS settings, platinum, gold, silver,
and bronze.
Okay, finally we’ll take a look at the advanced
tab.
In this tab there are lots of different settings.
For example, you could configure a maximum
number of clients allowed.
Currently it is 0, meaning there is no maximum.
Okay, I’ll scroll down to see other settings.
Here are some additional settings, for example
if you want to enable FlexConnect you can
do it here.
But I won’t touch these advanced settings,
so I will just click on Apply to finish editing
this WLAN.
Okay, the Internal WLAN is done.
Next I’ll click on Go here to create a new
WLAN, the guest WLAN.
Okay, since we’re creating a new WLAN this
time we have to specify the profile name,
SSID, and ID first.
The profile name is used to identify this
WLAN in the WLC, and usually you’ll just
make it the same as the SSID, as I did in
this case.
Note that the profile name and SSID don’t
have to be the same, though.
Then there is the ID, a unique number that
identifies the WLAN.
The Internal WLAN was 1, so I’ll make this
one 2.
So, I’ll click on apply to move forward.
Okay, now we’re at that same page.
Since we already went through all of the settings
for the Internal WLAN, I’ll go through this
quickly.
There are two things we should change on this
general tab.
First, the status.
The Internal WLAN was already enabled, but
this new one is not, so we should enable it
here.
And secondly, we should change the interface
to the Guest interface we created earlier.
Okay, I changed the settings.
Now, the only other change we have to make
is to change the security policy to use a
PSK on the security tab.
I’ve already shown you how to do that, so
for the sake of time let’s skip over that.
Okay, now we have two WLANs, the internal
WLAN and the guest WLAN.
So, let’s return to the monitoring dashboard
and see if anything is different.
Here’s the dashboard again.
I scrolled down a bit, and you can see that
we have 0 clients associated with the APs.
So, let’s change that.
On my iPhone you can see that the guest and
internal WLANs are visible, so I’ll join
with a few of my devices.
Okay, now you can see that there are 3 clients
associated with the APs.
To see a list of them, you can click clients,
here on the sidebar.
Here’s that list of clients.
It shows their IP Addresses, which AP they
are associated with, which SSID they are using,
etc.
Okay, we’ve looked at a lot in this video,
but before we finish up let’s take a quick
look at a couple more things.
Let’s go to the wireless tab here.
The first thing we’re shown is a list of
the APs that have joined with this WLC.
You can see their IP addresses, model numbers,
MAC addresses, etc.
Let’s click on an AP name and check the
settings.
Again, here you can see a lot of information
about this specific AP.
Look here, AP mode local.
You should know what this is.
Let’s check the other options.
These are the operational modes I covered
in earlier videos.
Local, flexconnect, monitor, rogue detector,
etc.
This is where you can configure the AP’s
operational mode, but I’ll leave it at the
default of local.
Okay, next let’s look at the management
tab.
Here is the management tab.
First, you can see a summary of the management
settings.
For example, SNMPv1 is disabled, but v2 and
v3 are enabled.
Syslog is currently disabled.
HTTP and HTTPS connections are enabled.
Telnet connections are disabled.
To prove this I tried to Telnet from my PC
to the WLC, but the connection failed.
Telnet is not a secure protocol, so it’s
best to leave it disabled.
SSH is enabled, and management via wireless
is disabled.
This means that a wireless client won’t
be able to connect to the WLC and manage it.
Only a device connected to the wired network
can.
Let’s change that setting by clicking on
management via wireless here.
You can change that setting by checking this
box here and then clicking apply.
If this is enabled, a wireless client, for
example a laptop using WiFi, will be able
to connect to the WLC and make configuration
changes.
Anyway, let’s look at one last thing, here
on the security tab.
So, I clicked on the security tab and then
Access Control Lists here.
Let’s configure an ACL to limit the management
traffic allowed to access the WLC.
There are no ACLs at the moment, so I’ll
click here to make a new one.
First I named the ACL MANAGEMENT_ACL, and
left the type as the default IPv4.
Then I clicked apply to move forward.
Okay, now the ACL has been created, but as
you can see here it still has no rules.
So, I’ll click here to add a new rule and
specify what traffic can access the WLC.
This is where you specify things like the
sequence number, source and destination IP,
protocol, DSCP marking, direction, etc.
So, I specified a sequence number, source
and destination, and then clicked on apply
to make the rule.
I followed that process again to make two
more rules, and now there are three rules
in this ACL.
Don’t worry about the exact contents of
these rules I’m making, I just want to show
how to make an ACL.
So, now that the ACL is made let’s apply
this ACL so that it limits access to manage
the WLC.
To do so, click here, CPU access control lists.
To apply the ACL, check enable CPU ACL here
and select the appropriate ACL from the list.
then simply click on apply.
And that’s all.
So, CPU ACLs are used to limit access to the
CPU of the WLC.
This limits which devices will be able to
connect to the WLC via Telnet/SSH, HTTP/HTTPS,
retrieve SNMP information from the WLC, etc.
This doesn’t affect traffic passing through
the WLC, only traffic destined directly for
the WLC.
Okay, there are so many more things I could
show you in the WLC, but this video is getting
quite long and we’ve covered what we need
to for the CCNA.
To practice for the CCNA you can just use
the WLC and APs in packet tracer, that’s
no problem at all.
But if you’re interested in really exploring
what you can do with a WLC, you can probably
get some second-hand hardware for cheap like
I did and set up your own home lab.
But again, that’s not necessary for CCNA
studies.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s review
what we learned in today’s video.
First I introduced the network topology we
used for today’s video.
Then I showed the configurations I did on
the switch, such as IP addresses, interface
settings, and DHCP pools.
Then I showed the basic WLC setup which is
required to access the GUI.
Then I showed how to configure WLC interfaces.
Remember the difference between physical ports
and logical interfaces.
Up to now I’ve always used the terms port
and interface interchangeably, but when talking
about WLCs you should be specific.
I then showed how to configure WLANs on a
WLC.
We configured the Internal WLAN and the Guest
WLAN.
And finally we looked at some additional features,
such as how to configure a CPU ACL to limit
management traffic to the WLC.
Make sure to watch until the end of the video
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which WLC port can be used to form an HA pair
with another WLC?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is redundancy port.
The redundancy port in this image is number
9.
It can be used to connect the two WLCs together
to form a high availability, HA pair.
One WLC will be active and the other will
be standby, ready to take over if the active
one fails.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which WLC interface type maps a WLAN to a
VLAN?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, dynamic interface.
Dynamic interfaces are used to send traffic
between wireless clients and VLANs on the
wired network.
In this video, for example, we created two
dynamic interfaces, Internal and Guest, and
used them to map the Internal and Guest WLANs
to VLANs 100 and 200.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following is a type of Layer
3 authentication?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
The answer is D, web authentication.
Web authentication can be configured under
the layer 3 security tab of a WLAN.
It requires users to authenticate with a username
and password before being permitted to access
the Internet.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which WLC QoS setting should be used for video
traffic?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, gold.
Here are those QoS options again.
Silver, best effort, is the default, but Gold
is recommended for video traffic.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which WLC port type can form a LAG to pass
standard data traffic?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, distribution system
port.
These ports are the standard network ports
that the WLC uses to pass data traffic to
and from wireless clients.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.