Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this lab we will practice some basic configurations
on a Cisco Wireless LAN Controller to set
up a simple wireless LAN.
Although the WLC in packet tracer is limited,
it’s good enough to practice what you need
to for the CCNA.
Note that, in this lab I have pre-configured
the switch, and more importantly I have done
the initial setup of the wireless LAN controller
so we can access the GUI.
In packet tracer you can’t access the console
port of the WLC, so to do the initial setup
you have to use the packet tracer GUI.
Honestly it was a bit frustrating to get it
working properly.
So, to make this video go smoothly the initial
setup has been pre-configured.
By initial setup, I mean the setup I did in
the CLI of the wireless LAN controller in
the lecture video.
So, now we can actually access the WLC GUI
and set up some wireless LANs.
Note that in the lab file I will share with
you, the initial setup is complete too.
So, if you want to do the initial setup yourself
when using my lab file, just delete the current
WLC, go to the wireless devices section down
here and add a new WLC.
I used the 3504.
So, before going into the GUI of the WLC,
let’s just take a quick look at the switch
config.
ENABLE.
SHOW RUN.
Okay, so like in the lecture video I will
use the switch as a DHCP server.
Note that I configured some excluded address
ranges.
This is generally a good practice when configuring
DHCP.
Even if you don’t need them now, you might
want to assign a static IP address to some
devices in the future.
Okay, and down below we have the DHCP pools
themselves.
We have the VLAN10 pool, which will be used
to give IP addresses to the APs, as well as
PC1 which we will use to access the GUI of
the WLC.
Note that I added option 43, which will tell
the APs the IP address of their WLC.
As I explained in the lecture video, in this
network it actually isn’t necessary.
When the APs boot up they will send broadcast
CAPWAP messages to check if there are any
WLCs on the local network.
In this case WLC1 is connected to the same
local network as AP1 and AP2, so it should
reply to their broadcasts.
No need for this option 43.
Anyway, then we have DHCP pools for VLAN100
and VLAN200.
These pools will be used for the wireless
clients using the Internal and Guest SSIDs.
Okay, looking down a bit more we have the
three VLANs, management, internal, and guest.
And here are the interfaces.
Note that this time I setup the WLC to not
tag traffic in the management VLAN, and I
also configured the management VLAN, VLAN10,
as the native VLAN on SW1’s G1/0/1 interface.
So, management traffic won’t be tagged.
You can choose to tag or not tag the traffic,
but make sure it’s the same on both the
WLC side and the switch side, or else they
won’t be able to communicate.
G1/0/2, 3, and 4, connected to the APs and
PC1, are access ports in VLAN10.
Okay and after the physical interfaces we
can see that SW1 has an interface for each
VLAN as well.
Just like in the lecture video, I have designed
the network so that SW1’s SVIs will be the
default gateway for hosts in each of the subnets.
Note that I didn’t add these MAC-ADDRESS
commands myself, they were added automatically
by packet tracer.
Okay, that was a brief overview of the switch’s
configurations, mostly the same as in the
lecture video.
Now I’ll switch over to PC1.
From the desktop tab, click on ‘web browser’.
And now let’s access the GUI of the WLC.
Note that, with the model of WLC I’m using,
I have to use HTTPS.
It doesn’t allow HTTP connections by default.
So, HTTPS://172.16.1.10.
Okay, here is the login screen of the WLC,
let’s login.
The username is admin, and the password is
Cisco123, with a capital C.
And here we are, the GUI.
This is actually very accurate, and exploring
the GUI in packet tracer is a great way to
get familiar with it and prepare for the exam.
Of course, the functionality is quite limited,
but it’s more than enough for the CCNA level.
You can see which interface SW1 is connected
to, it’s port 1 which is green here.
And if we scroll down, we can see that the
two APs have already joined with the WLC.
However there aren’t any clients at the
moment.
So, in step 2 I say to spend some time familiarizing
yourself with the WLC GUI.
By that I mean just look around each tab and
see what information you can find, what settings
you can configure, etc.
For the sake of time we won’t spend a lot
of time looking around, but for example here’s
one handy feature.
From this default monitor tab, click on statistics
and then AP join.
Here you can see the APs that have joined,
or tried to join, the WLC.
You can see AP1 and AP2 here, and their status
is joined.
If I click on one, we can see more details.
This screen is very handy for troubleshooting
if an AP is unable to join the WLC.
For example you can see which messages were
exchanged by the WLC and AP when it was joining,
and if you scroll down you can see different
statistics, including information like ‘reason
for last unsuccessful attempt’ if an AP
failed to join.
Anyway, I recommend spending some time looking
around the WLC to get familiar, but let’s
move on.
For step 3, let’s configure some dynamic
interfaces to be used for the internal and
guest WLANs.
That is under the controller tab.
Make sure you know things like that for the
exam.
Know which tab to use to create or edit interfaces
on the WLC.
Cisco could test how familiar you are with
the GUI.
Okay, next I’ll click on interfaces.
On the top right of this screen, I can create
a new interface.
I’ll name it Internal, and give it a VLAN
ID of 100.
Then click on apply.
Okay, now let’s configure it.
First, which physical port will be used?
Only one is connected, and that is port 1,
so I’ll change this to 1.
Then the VLAN ID is 100, the IP address is
10.0.0.10, and I’ll configure a /24 netmask.
Finally the gateway is 10.0.0.1, the SVI of
SW1.
Also let’s configure SW1 as the DHCP server
too, 10.0.0.1.
That’s all.
Scroll back up, and click apply.
Click past this warning, and now it’s configured.
I’ll click BACK.
There it is.
So, the dynamic interface for the Internal
WLAN is done, so let’s make one more for
the Guest WLAN.
Click on New.
I’ll name it Guest, and assign VLAN ID 200.
Then click on apply.
On this screen, again the port number is 1,
the only one connected at the moment.
The VLAN ID is 200, that’s fine.
Then the IP address is 10.1.0.10.
Netmask is 255.255.255.0.
Gateway is 10.1.0.1, the SVI of SW1.
And once again SW1 is the DHCP server, 10.1.0.1.
That’s it.
I’ll click on apply, and then BACK.
So, that’s all we need to do to create the
dynamic interfaces.
Pretty simple.
Finally let’s create the two WLANs themselves.
We can do that from the WLANs tab, of course.
Notice there are no WLANs at the moment.
Actually in the initial setup I had to make
one, but I deleted it before starting this
video.
So, let’s create 2 new ones from the beginning.
Click on GO here next to create new.
So, the type is WLAN, this is a normal WLAN.
The profile name is just a name used to identify
the WLAN in the WLC.
Usually you’ll just make it the same as
the SSID, so I’ll make both Internal.
The ID at the bottom is a number that identifies
the WLAN in the WLC.
It has to be unique, but it doesn’t matter
what it is.
I’ll leave it at 1, and click Apply.
Okay, here’s where we configure the main
settings.
First, in the general tab I must enable the
WLAN, that’s very important.
And I also should map this WLAN to the Internal
dynamic interface, not the management interface.
Okay, that’s all we need to do here on the
general tab.
Next is the security tab.
The CCNA exam requires us to be able to configure
WLANs using WPA2 with pre-shared key authentication.
So, select WPA+WPA2 as the layer 2 security.
I’ll then enable WPA2 policy here, and leave
AES encryption enabled.
Next, I won’t enable 802.1X, we don’t
need that for the CCNA.
Instead I’ll just enable PSK, pre-shared
key.
I’ll configure it the same as the WLC password,
Cisco123 with a capital C. Okay, that’s
all here.
I won’t touch the layer 3 or AAA tabs.
Next let’s look at the QoS tab.
I won’t touch anything here, actually packet
tracer doesn’t allow me to touch anything
here.
Even if I click on the QoS setting, the menu
doesn’t appear.
As I said, the functionality is quite limited,
but at least you can look around and get familiar
with the GUI.
Finally I’ll look at the advanced tab.
Most of this you can’t configure either,
but for example I’ll set the maximum allowed
clients to 100.
That’s all for now, so I’ll click Apply
to save the settings, and then click on BACK.
Okay, the Internal WLAN has been created,
and notice the security policy is WPA2 with
PSK authentication.
Perfect.
Now let’s create the Guest WLAN.
Click on Go.
I’ll make both the profile name and SSID
guest, and then click on Apply.
Make sure to enable this one too, that’s
an easy mistake to make.
Now let’s set the interface, which should
be Guest, which will map the Guest WLAN to
the Guest dynamic interface.
Next let’s move on to security.
Again, select WPA+WPA2, enable WPA2 policy,
enable PSK authentication, and configure the
PSK.
That’s all I’ll configure for this WLAN.
So, click on apply, and then click on back.
Okay, finally let’s add a wireless client
and associate it with an AP.
From the end devices section down here, I’ll
add a smart phone.
Now let’s make it join the Internal SSID.
To do that open it up and go to the config
tab.
Then click on the Wireless0 interface, this
is its WiFi radio.
Note here the SSID is default.
I’ll change it to Internal.
Then we have to select the kind of authentication.
It should be WPA2-PSK, and then the PSK pass
phrase is Cisco123.
And that’s it, that’s all we have to do.
Note that the IP configuration is already
set to DHCP.
So, if we wait a bit it should associate with
an AP, get an IP address from SW1 via DHCP,
and then be able to communicate on the network.
And indeed it worked.
Notice that you can see the association here
on the diagram, and also that it got an IP
address.
But there is a problem here, did you notice
it?
Look at the IP address of the phone.
Even though we’re associated with the Internal
WLAN, which is mapped to the Internal dynamic
interface, which is in VLAN100 and should
get an IP address from the VLAN100 pool, it
got an IP address from the VLAN10 pool, the
management subnet.
Don’t worry, this isn’t a problem with
our configurations.
If you did the same configurations with real
hardware, as I confirmed, the device will
get an IP address from the correct pool.
Packet tracer just doesn’t behave accurately,
unfortunately.
But that’s okay.
The goal of this lab was to practice some
basic WLAN configurations in the GUI of a
Cisco WLC, and that’s what we did.
That’s all for this lab, thanks for watching.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Marko, tanvir, Amiens, Gina,
Valeri, Vitaos, Benjie, Khoa, Ricardo, Mason,
Meir, Pietrocious, Dragos, Gerrard, Tom, Tebogo,
Pavel, Abraham, Njoku, Suki, Kenneth, Seamus,
Marcel, Kone, Echo, Gustavo, Prakaash, Nasir,
Erlison, Ed, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum,
Boson Software, Devin, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, October
23rd 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future
videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.