Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we’ll look at network automation.
Actually this will be a series of videos covering
various topics related to network automation,
and this first video will be an introduction
to some of the foundational concepts which
we will cover in more detail in later videos.
Automation is section 6.0 of the CCNA exam
topics, and it is 10% of the exam.
Read these exam topics carefully.
They state that you have to be able to explain,
compare, describe, recognize, and interpret
different things.
However you don’t actually have to be able
to automate networking tasks yourself.
Cisco just wants you to understand various
topics related to network automation, but
the actual hands-on automation is left for
other certifications at the CCNP level and
above, as well as the DevNet certification
track.
In this video we’ll mostly be looking at
these three topics, 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3, giving
a general overview of network automation and
its benefits.
Here’s what we’ll cover.
First I’ll give a quick overview of why
network automation is used, and some of its
benefits.
I’ll then explain the logical planes of
network functions, the data plane, control
plane, and management plane.
Maybe you’ve heard of these before, but
maybe you haven’t.
I’ll explain what they are, because they
are essential to understanding the next topic,
software-defined networking.
While introducing SDN, I’ll also introduce
APIs and data serialization.
As I said, this video will be an introduction
to all of these topics, and then I’ll cover
them in greater detail in the next few videos.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
video for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA, the best practice
exams for the CCNA.
So let’s look at network automation.
Previous versions of the CCNA focused on the
traditional model of managing and controlling
networks.
Actually, the current version does too, but
you are expected to have a basic understanding
of various topics related to network automation,
and that’s what we’ll focus on in these
next few videos.
In the traditional model, engineers manage
devices one at a time by connecting to their
CLI via SSH.
Telnet connections are possible too of course,
as well as connections to the console port.
Some devices support a GUI also.
But the main point here is that devices are
managed and configured one by one.
So, let’s say your company wants to add
a loopback interface to all of their routers.
You connect to R1 using SSH, configure the
loopback interface, save the config, and exit
out.
Then you do it for R2.
And R3.
And R4.
And every one of the hundreds of routers in
your company network.
So what are some downsides to managing a network
like this?
Here are a few.
First, typos and other small mistakes are
common.
I’m sure that as you’ve been doing practice
labs for the CCNA you’ve made typos at some
point.
Sometimes you realize it immediately and fix
it, but then other times it can take a lot
of time troubleshooting to find that the problem
was just a typo in an IP address, for example.
It is also time consuming and can be very
inefficient especially in large-scale networks.
Repetitive tasks can be automated and performed
in a fraction of the time.
And here’s another issue that might be harder
to imagine if you don’t have any work experience
as a network engineer yet.
It is difficult to ensure that all devices
adhere to the organization’s standard configurations.
An organization will usually have standard
configuration templates that they use for
their devices, and it’s important to ensure
that these policies are upheld throughout
the network.
However, as individual network engineers make
individual changes over the years, the configurations
can start to drift away from the standard.
This can cause issues down the line, for example
making troubleshooting more difficult because
the devices don’t all have similar configurations.
Of course, when I talk about the disadvantages
of the traditional model, I’m talking about
it in comparison to network management and
operation using automation.
Network automation offers many key benefits.
Here are some of them.
First, human error is reduced, for example
typos.
Instead of a network engineer directly logging
in to the CLI and manually entering commands,
the task can be automated.
Networks become much more scalable.
New network deployments, network-wide changes,
as well as troubleshooting can be implemented
in a fraction of the time.
Also, network-wide policy compliance can be
assured, for example making sure all devices
have the proper standard configurations, all
devices have the correct software versions,
etc.
And the improved efficiency of network operations
reduces the opex, meaning operating expenses,
of the network.
Each task requires fewer man-hours, and engineers
can focus on more important things.
For example, in the same situation as before
when we need to add a new loopback interface
to hundreds of routers, instead of logging
into each router one by one and manually configuring
a loopback interface, which could take hours
of time, a python script could perform the
task and make the proper configurations in
a fraction of the time.
Note that there are various tools and methods
that can be used to automate tasks in the
network.
Here are some examples.
SDN, Ansible, Puppet, Python scripts, and
many more.
Throughout these videos I’ll introduce multiple
different methods, but for the rest of this
video let’s focus on the concept of SDN,
software-defined networking.
To understand SDN, you have to understand
the logical planes of network functions.
Let me explain.
Here you can see two simple questions.
What does a router do?
And what does a switch do?
Here are some example answers.
A router forwards messages between networks
by examining information in the Layer 3 header.
And a switch forwards messages within a LAN
by examining information in the Layer 2 header.
Okay, but is that all that routers and switches
do?
A router also uses a routing protocol like
OSPF to share routing information with others
routers and build a routing table.
It also uses ARP to build an ARP table, mapping
IP addresses to MAC addresses.
For example, it would use ARP to learn the
MAC address of the next hop router when forwarding
a packet.
It also uses Syslog to keep logs of events
that occur.
We are also able to use SSH to connect to
a router and manage it.
And of course there are many more things that
routers do, as we’ve learned in this course.
How about switches?
A switch uses STP to ensure that there are
no Layer 2 loops in the network.
It builds a MAC address table by examining
the source MAC address of frames.
Like a router, it also uses protocols like
Syslog and SSH.
Those are just some examples, there are many
more functions of a switch.
And if it’s a Layer 3 switch, it can have
the same functions of a router, like using
OSPF to build a routing table.
Anyway, the point is that routers and switches
do a lot of different things.
They don’t just forward messages at Layer
2 or Layer 3.
And these various functions of network devices
can be logically divided up, logically categorized,
into what we call planes.
Typically we divide the functions into three
planes.
The data plane, the control plane, and the
management plane.
Let’s take a look at the functions of each
plane.
First let’s look at the data plane.
All tasks involved in forwarding user data
from one interface to another are part of
the data plane.
So, this is what you usually think of a router
or switch doing, forwarding messages.
A router receives a message, looks for the
most specific matching route in its routing
table, and forwards it out of the appropriate
interface to the next hop.
Or to the destination, if its directly connected.
It also de-encapsulates the original Layer
2 header, and re-encapsulates with a new header
destined for the next hop’s MAC address.
All of these functions are part of the data
plane.
Likewise, a switch receives a message, looks
at the destination MAC address, and forwards
it out of the appropriate interface.
Or it floods it out of all interfaces when
appropriate.
This also includes functions like adding or
removing dot1q VLAN tags.
Also, functions like NAT, which changes the
source and/or destination addresses before
forwarding, is part of the data plane.
It’s part of the process of forwarding a
message.
Also, deciding to forward or discard a message
due to ACLs, port security, etc is part of
the data plane.
Note that another name for the data plane
is the forwarding plane, because that’s
what it does.
It forwards messages.
Here’s an example with two routers.
R1 receives a packet, and the data plane processes
the packet to forward it out of another interface
to R2.
And then R2’s data plane processes the packet
to forward it out of another interface.
In this instance R2 discarded a packet from
R1.
Perhaps an ACL configured on R2’s interface
caused it to make that decision.
Anyway, that’s an action of the data plane.
Next, let’s look at the control plane.
How does a device’s data plane make its
forwarding decisions?
How can a router choose which interface to
forward a packet out of?
How does it know what the next hop is?
Devices use things like their routing table,
MAC address table, ARP table, STP, among other
things, to make these forwarding decisions.
Functions that build these tables, and other
functions that influence the data plane, are
part of the control plane.
So, the control plane controls what the data
plane does, for example by building the router’s
routing table.
The functions of the control plane are considered
overhead work.
Let me explain that statement with some examples.
The OSPF protocol itself doesn’t forward
user data packets, but it informs the data
plane about how packets should be forwarded.
Likewise, STP itself isn’t directly involved
in the process of forwarding frames, but it
informs the data plane about which interfaces
should and shouldn’t be used to forward
frames.
One more example, ARP messages aren’t user
data, but they are used to build an ARP table
which is used in the process of forwarding
data.
So, I think you can get an idea of what is
involved in the control plane.
Let me demonstrate again with a diagram.
R1 and R2 communicate using OSPF, and this
allows both of them to build their routing
tables.
These routing tables control the actions of
the data plane, which is where the actual
forwarding of data packets takes place.
So, in traditional networking the data plane
and control plane are both distributed.
Each device has its own data plane and its
own control plane, so they are distributed
throughout the network.
It’s not one centralized control plane that
controls the entire network.
This is different than in software-defined
networking, which we’ll look at shortly.
Finally let’s look at the management plane.
Like the control plane, the management plane
performs overhead work.
However, the management plane doesn’t directly
affect the forwarding of messages in the data
plane.
Instead, it consists of protocols that are
used to manage devices.
For example, SSH and Telnet, which are used
to connect to the CLI of a device to configure
and manage it.
Or Syslog, which is used to keep logs of events
that occur on the device.
Also SNMP, which is mainly used to monitor
the operations and status of the device.
NTP is another example, which is used to maintain
accurate time on the device.
There’s not much else to say about the management
plane, it’s fairly self-explanatory.
And here’s an example of management plane
operations.
A network engineer uses SSH to connect to
the routers and do some configurations.
For example, perhaps he configured OSPF and
now the control planes of the routers are
using OSPF to exchange routing information.
This then determines how packets are forwarded
in the data plane.
And that’s a basic summary of how these
three logical planes work.
The data plane is really the essential one,
it’s the reason we buy routers and switches.
We want them to forward messages.
But in order for the data plane to do its
job, we need the control plane and the management
plane.
Before wrapping up this section I want to
give a little bit more detail about the data
plane.
The operations of the management plane and
control plane are usually managed by the CPU
of the device.
However, this is not desirable for data plane
operations because CPU processing is slow,
relatively speaking.
So, instead a specialized hardware ASIC, application-specific
integrated circuit, is used.
These are chips built for specific purposes,
such as forwarding frames in a switch.
Here is a picture from Wikipedia of some ASICs.
Let me use a switch as an example to demonstrate
how this works.
When a frame is received, the ASIC, not the
CPU, is responsible for the switching logic.
Remember, this is a specialized chip designed
for forwarding frames, unlike the general-purpose
CPU.
Also, the MAC address table is stored in a
kind of memory called TCAM, ternary content-addressable
memory.
TCAM allows for very fast lookups of MAC addresses.
Definitely remember that term, TCAM.
Also note that another common name for the
MAC address table is CAM table, content addressable
memory table.
So, the ASIC feeds the destination MAC address
of the frame into the TCAM, which returns
the matching MAC address table entry, and
then it is forwarded out of the appropriate
interface.
Note that modern routers also use a similar
hardware data plane, with an ASIC designed
for forwarding logic and the necessary tables
stored in TCAM.
So, to summarize this: when a device receives
control or management traffic, destined for
the device itself, it will be processed in
the CPU.
However when a device receives data traffic
which should pass through the device, it is
processed by the ASIC for maximum speed.
Note that not all data plane traffic is processed
by the ASIC, sometimes the CPU is necessary,
but for now I won’t go any further into
this topic.
We can leave that for CCNP-level studies.
So, the reason I spent all of that time going
over the logical planes is that they are essential
to understanding the next concept, software-defined
networking.
SDN is an approach to networking that centralizes
the control plane into an application called
a controller.
Now, this isn’t a new concept for you.
You should be familiar with it already from
learning about wireless LAN controllers.
When using a WLC, many functions are removed
from the APs and centralized in the controller,
so the APs role primarily becomes just forwarding
traffic.
Note that SDN can also be called software-defined
architecture or controller-based networking.
As I said earlier, traditional control planes
use a distributed architecture, for example
each router runs OSPF, shares routing information
with other routers, and then independently
calculates its preferred routes to each destination.
An SDN controller centralizes control plane
functions like calculating routes.
Note that that is just an example, and how
much of the control plane is centralized varies
greatly.
There are many different SDN solutions available,
and the role of the controller and the network
devices varies in each solution.
A controller can interact programmatically
with the network devices using APIs.
APIs are application programming interfaces.
I’m sure that many of you have heard of
this term, even though you might not be 100%
sure exactly what it means.
I will dedicate a video to APIs later, so
I’ll explain them at that point, although
I will briefly introduce them in this video.
So, here’s our traditional architecture.
Note that for the purpose of this discussion
I’m leaving the management plane out.
We’re just focusing on the functions of
the control plane.
Now I’ve removed the control planes from
R1 and R2.
Then, we have a controller, an application
running on a centralized server, and the control
plane of the network is centralized here.
Instead of R1 and R2 using OSPF to exchange
routing information and then calculate routes,
the controller communicates with R1 and R2
to program their data planes.
So, instead of the control plane being distributed,
each router having its own control plane,
it is centralized in the controller.
I’m only showing two routers here, but this
could be a network with hundreds of routers,
and this controller would operate the control
plane of the entire network.
The communication between the devices and
the controller is done via what’s called
the southbound interface, SBI.
It’s called southbound because in diagrams
we usually draw the controller on top and
the network devices on the bottom, the south.
Note that this term doesn’t refer to any
physical interface on a device, but rather
a software interface that is used to allow
the controller and network devices to communicate.
Now, before moving on to the next slide I
want to repeat that, although this diagram
shows a totally centralized control plane,
in reality there are many different solutions.
Some of them centralize the entire control
plane, and some of them only centralize some
functions of the control plane.
So let’s look at SBIs, southbound interfaces.
The SBI is used for communications between
the controller and the network devices it
controls.
In the diagram, R1 and R2 are controlled by
the controller, and the SBI is used to communicate
between them.
The SBI typically consists of a communication
protocol and API, application programming
interface.
As I said before we’ll cover APIs in another
video.
But basically, they are used to facilitate
data exchanges between programs.
The controller is a program, and the network
devices are programs too, running within their
hardware.
So, data is exchanged between the controller
and the network devices, and for example an
API on the network device can allow the controller
to access information on them, control their
data plane tables that are used to forward
packets, etc.
APIs play a big role in automating networking
tasks, so we’ll go more in depth later.
Here are some examples of south bound interfaces.
OpenFlow, Cisco OpFlex, Cisco onePK, and NETCONF.
I will cover some of these in more detail
in later videos, but for now I recommend just
memorizing their names and remembering that
they are southbound interfaces, used by the
controller to communicate with the devices
it controls.
In addition to the southbound interface, there
is also a northbound interface.
So, to review, using the SBI the controller
communicates with the managed devices and
gathers information about them.
For example, which devices are in the network,
the topology, so how the devices are connected
together.
Which interfaces are available on the device,
their configurations, such as IP addresses
etc, and much more information.
That’s what the SBI is used for.
The northbound interface, NBI, is what allows
us to interact with the controller, access
the data it gathers about the network, program
the controller, and makes changes in the network
via the SBI.
We can tell the controller to make a change,
and it will make the change via the SBI.
So, here we have an app, and it will use the
northbound interface to communicate with the
controller.
I explained the name southbound interface
already, so I think you can guess why this
is called the northbound interface.
A REST API is used on the controller as an
interface for the apps to interact with it.
REST stands for representational state transfer,
by the way.
I’ll explain REST APIs more in the API video.
Just note that REST isn’t a specific API,
but a type of API.
So, there is an interface on the controller.
As I mentioned earlier, this isn’t a physical
interface, but rather a software interface,
it’s code that facilitates communication
between the controller and the apps.
So, the app sends a GET message to the API
for example, which is a request for some data.
The controller will reply with the requested
data in a structured format like JSON or XML.
Perhaps you’ve heard of JSON or XML before.
I’ll make a separate video explaining them,
but for now just understand that they are
standard formats for structuring data.
Why should data be structured?
It makes it much easier for programs to use
the data, because its stored in a standard
format that is easy to interact with.
Okay, that was a basic overview of the main
components of SDN architecture.
Before wrapping up the video, let’s spend
some more time comparing it with traditional
networks.
So, we’ve been looking at SDN a lot, but
networking tasks can be automated in traditional
network architectures too.
For example, scripts can be written, for example
in Python, to push commands to many devices
at once.
The script can enable your computer to SSH
to the device and then push whatever commands
you want, perhaps configuring VLANs on many
switches.
Also, Python with good use of regular expressions
can parse through show commands to gather
information about the network devices.
If you don’t know what regular expressions
are you can google it, but basically they
are just ways of searching for patterns in
text.
Look at this SHOW command for example, SHOW
INTERFACES.
This is in a human-readable format, it’s
pretty simple for us to read through this
and get what information we need.
For example, if you want to know the bandwidth
you can just look here and see BW 1,000,000
kilobits per second, so 1 gig.
You can write a script that does the same,
it could SSH to the device, use the SHOW INTERFACES
command, and then parse through the output
with regular expressions to find the information
you want.
However, the robust and centralized data collected
by SDN controllers greatly facilitates these
functions.
The controller collects robust information
about all devices in the network, providing
a network-wide view.
Also the northbound APIs allow apps to access
information in a format that is easy for programs
to understand, formats such as JSON or XML.
No need to write scripts to parse through
specific SHOW commands to get the information
you want.
Also, having this centralized data facilitates
network-wide analytics, rather than getting
information from individual devices and having
to correlate the data yourself.
SDN tools provide the benefits of automation
without the requirement of third-party apps
and scripts.
This also means that you don’t need expertise
in automation to make use of SDN tools.
Many of them are very easy to use even for
those who are unable to write their own scripts.
However, APIs allow third-party applications
to interact with the controller, which can
be very powerful if you’re able to create
your own apps.
To summarize, although SDN and automation
aren’t the same thing, SDN is just one aspect
of network automation, the SDN architecture
greatly facilitates the automation of various
tasks in the network via the SDN controller
and APIs.
In this video we covered various topics related
to network automation, and SDN in particular.
We didn’t really go in depth, but that’s
fine.
This is an introductory video to the automation
section of the course which will be 4 or 5
videos in total, so we have plenty of time
to learn the details.
But network automation is a paradigm shift
compared to traditional networking, so instead
of digging into the details right away I think
it’s best to get a general overview of the
important topics.
In the next video we’ll look at data serialization,
such as JSON and XML, in more detail.
This is an important topic because it puts
data in a format that is easy for programs
to understand and work with.
Okay, let’s go into the quiz for today,
and make sure to watch until the end of the
quiz for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim for CCNA, the best practice exams for
the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which of the following are benefits of network
automation?
(select two).
Pause the video now to select the best answers,
select two.
Okay, the answers are A, reduced human error,
and B, reduced OpEx.
Because automation means network engineers
don’t have to spend so much time inputting
commands into the CLI, human error such as
typos can be reduced.
Also, tasks can be achieved in a much shorter
period of time, which reduces the OpEx, operating
expenses, of the network.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following are SBIs?
(select two).
Pause the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are C, OpenFlow and D, OpFlex.
Other examples of SBIs given in this video
are Cisco onePK and NETCONF.
We’ll cover some of them in detail later,
but for now just remember that they are SBIs,
southbound interfaces.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following network functions would
you expect to be centralized in SDN?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, calculating routes.
B, C, and D are all data plane functions,
they describe functions involved in forwarding
messages.
A, calculating routes, is a function of the
control plane and will likely be centralized
in an SDN architecture.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
What is the purpose of the SBI in SDN architecture?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, to facilitate data
exchange between the controller and network
devices.
For review, here’s that diagram again showing
the role of the southbound interface.
Regarding option B, it is the northbound interface,
NBI, that facilitates data exchange between
the controller and apps, not the SBI.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the logical planes of networking
does NTP’s function fit in?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, management plane.
NTP is used to provide accurate time for the
device.
It is not involved in the forwarding of messages,
and it does not control how the data plane
operates.
Instead, it operates at the management plane.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s look at a bonus question in Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA.