Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will look at REST APIs.
APIs are used to allow programs to exchange
information with each other.
They are important for network automation
because they allow our programs to easily
interact with network devices and controllers.
REST APIs specifically are commonly used for
the Northbound interface in SDN architecture.
I’ve already briefly introduced REST APIs
and SDN, but in this video we’ll look at
REST APIs in greater depth, and then in the
next we’ll do the same for SDN.
This video will cover exam topic 6.5, which
states that you must be able to describe characteristics
of REST-based APIs.
So, as with all of the exam topics in this
section, Cisco doesn’t expect you to master
the use of REST APIs, they just expect you
to have a foundational understanding.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll briefly review APIs.
Then I’ll introduce CRUD operations and
HTTP.
CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update, and
Delete, and it refers to the different actions
we perform when using REST APIs.
HTTP also uses CRUD operations, and REST APIs
often use HTTP as their communication protocol
over the network, so it’s important to understand
HTTP.
Then I’ll outline the characteristics of
REST APIs, and finally we’ll use Cisco DevNet
to try out a couple basic REST API Calls,
and it’s free to use so you can follow along
too.
Make sure to watch until the end of the video
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
So, let’s quickly review what an API is.
An API, application programming interface,
is a software interface that allows two applications
to communicate with each other.
They are essential not just for network automation,
but for all kinds of applications.
If you want other applications to be able
to access data from your application, you
should design an API that allows them to access
it.
Here’s that basic diagram of SDN architecture
again, which we’ll cover in greater detail
in the next video.
In SDN architecture, APIs are used to communicate
between apps and the SDN controller via the
northbound interface, and between the SDN
controller and the network devices via the
southbound interface.
The NBI typically uses REST APIs, the topic
of this video.
Some other examples of APIs that can be used
to configure network devices via the southbound
interface are NETCONF and RESTCONF, but we
won’t cover those in this video.
You’ll have to learn more about those for
the CCNP and beyond, however.
So, let’s take a look at CRUD.
CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update, Delete,
and it refers to the operations we perform
using REST APIs.
But this CRUD framework isn’t just used
by REST APIs, and I’ll introduce it using
HTTP in the next slide.
First let’s look at the definition of each
of those operations.
Create operations are used to create new variables
and set their initial values.
For example, you could create a variable “ip_address”
and set the value to “10.1.1.1”.
Read operations are used to retrieve the value
of a variable, for example you could then
ask ‘What is the value of variable “ip_address”?
Update operations are used to change the value
of a variable, for example you could change
the value of the variable “ip_address”
to “10.2.3.4”.
And finally delete operations are used to
delete variables, so you could delete the
variable “ip_address”.
So, those are the CRUD operations, now let’s
look at HTTP.
First, why should I talk about HTTP, even
though this video is about REST?
First, HTTP uses ‘verbs’ or ‘methods’
that map to these CRUD operations, and these
CRUD operations match the actions we typically
want to perform with an application.
When an HTTP client sends a request to an
HTTP server, it includes a verb indicating
what the client wants to do.
For example, if the client is trying to access
a web page on a server, it will use the GET
verb to retrieve that web page, to get it,
from the server.
And for this reason, among others, REST APIs
typically use HTTP as their application-layer
protocol to communicate over the network.
So, let’s compare these CRUD operations
to HTTP verbs.
Here is a simple chart.
The HTTP verb POST is used to create a new
variable.
The equivalent of a read operation is GET.
There are two main options for the update
operation, PUT and PATCH, and the verb for
the delete operation is simply DELETE.
You don’t have to know the exact details
of these verbs, but definitely know which
ones are used for which CRUD operation.
The flashcards will help with remembering
them.
There are other HTTP verbs too, and you can
see them in this guide from Mozilla if you
want to learn more.
Let’s look more at how those verbs are used.
When an HTTP client, or a REST client using
HTTP, sends a request to a server, it includes
some information such as an HTTP verb, which
I just introduced and a URI, uniform resource
identifier, indicating the resource it is
trying to access.
So, here we have a server storing data as
variables, with a URI for each resource.
The client sends a GET message, for example,
trying to retrieve the resource with URI A.
The server would then send a response, but
I’ll get into the details of the response
soon.
Here’s an example of a URI, and I’ll use
this URI later when demonstrating a REST API
call on Cisco DevNet.
Note the three main sections.
First is the scheme, which is basically the
protocol.
In this case HTTP, or more specifically HTTPS,
HTTP Secure, is the protocol.
Then there is the authority.
This is basically the address, or hostname,
you are sending the request to.
After that is the path, this indicates the
resource you want to access.
Now, the Verb and URI are just part of the
HTTP request, let’s look at some more of
an HTTP request.
The HTTP request can include additional headers
which pass additional information to the server.
There is a great list at this page here from
Mozilla.
Here’s an example of an HTTP request message.
On the outside there is an IP header and a
TCP header, then the HTTP verb and URI, followed
by some additional headers and data.
An example header would be the Accept header,
which informs the server about the type or
types of data that can be sent back to the
client.
The client might say I accept JSON data or
XML data, for example.
There’s another list of standard HTTP headers
here on Wikipedia, and there are examples
for each header so you can see what kind of
information is included.
Now, before I continue I want to clarify once
more why I’m spending so much time talking
about HTTP in a video that’s supposed to
be about REST APIs.
It’s because when a REST client makes an
API call, a request to a REST server, it will
send an HTTP request like the one above.
So, you have to understand some basics about
HTTP.
Note that REST APIs don’t actually HAVE
to use HTTP for communication, although HTTP
is the most common choice.
For the purpose of the CCNA you can assume
that REST APIs use HTTP, but just keep in
mind that HTTP is a specific communication
protocol, and REST is a framework for building
APIs.
They aren’t the same thing, and they aren’t
always used together.
Now, after the client’s HTTP request the
server has to send a response.
Let’s look a bit at what is in that response.
The server’s response will include a status
code indicating if the request succeeded or
failed, as well as other details.
You might not know it, but I’m sure you’ve
seen at least one of these codes before.
The first digit indicates the class, the type,
of the response.
Here are the different classes.
If the response code begins with a 1, it is
an informational response.
This indicates that the server received the
request, but the exact meaning beyond that
depends on the remaining two digits of the
response code.
We’ll look at an example in the next slide.
If the response code begins with a 2, the
class is ‘successful’.
This means the request was successfully received,
understood, and accepted.
This is usually the class of response you
want from the server.
If the response code begins with a 3 the class
is redirection.
It means that further action is required to
be taken in order to complete the request.
For example, if the URI of the resource has
been changed, this response can tell the client
to request the new URI to get the resource.
If the response code begins with a 4, the
response class is client error.
This means there was some error in the request
and it can’t be fulfilled, such as requesting
a resource that doesn’t exist.
Let me show an example of that.
The client sends a GET request for the resource
at URI G, however that doesn’t exist on
the server.
So, it sends a response with response code
404, indicating the resource was not found.
I think many of you will recognize the 404
code, you’ve probably seen it on the Internet
before.
For example, I tried to access google.com/jeremysitlab,
and I got an error message.
Notice the response code, 404, indicating
that the resource was not found.
I got this error message because google.com/jeremysitlab
doesn’t exist, at least not until Google
acquires my company for the low price of a
billion dollars.
If anyone from Google’s watching, I’m
waiting for your offer.
Anyway, there is one more class of response.
If the response code begins with a 5 the class
is server error.
This means that the request was valid, but
the server was unable to fulfill it for some
reason.
For example, perhaps the server doesn’t
support the HTTP version of the request.
Here are some examples of each HTTP Response
class.
I’ll just give one or two examples for each.
For the informational class, you might see
code 102, which means processing.
This indicates that the server has received
the request and is processing it, but the
response is not yet available.
For the successful class you might see code
200, meaning OK.
This indicates that the request succeeded.
If this is in response to a GET request, for
example, the code 200 in the header will indicate
it was successful, and in the message body
the requested resource is sent.
Another example is 201, created, which indicates
that the request succeeded and a new resource
was created, for example in response to a
POST request.
Remember, POST is equivalent to the CRUD Create
operation.
In the redirection class, 301, moved permanently,
indicates that the requested resource has
been moved, and the server indicates its new
location to the client.
In the client error class we have 403, unauthorized.
This means that the client must authenticate
to get a response.
Note that when talking about AAA in the security
section of the course I told you about authentication
and authorization.
They are different things.
The official name for code 403 is unauthorized,
but maybe a better name would be unauthenticated,
because it indicates that the client needs
to authenticate.
Another example is 404, indicating that the
requested resource was not found.
Finally, an example of the server error class
is 500 internal server error, indicating that
the server encountered something unexpected
that it doesn’t know how to handle.
These are just a few examples, but there are
many more HTTP response codes.
If you’re curious about the others, check
out this page, once again from Mozilla.
You can also check out this page for a summary
of which Response codes you might see in response
to each HTTP verb.
Okay, that’s enough about HTTP.
Let’s finally take a look at some characteristics
of REST APIs.
REST stands for representational state transfer.
And REST APIs are also known as REST-based
APIs or RESTful APIs.
I usually just call them REST APIs.
Note that, as I’ve said before, REST isn’t
a specific API.
Rather, it describes a set of rules about
how the API should work.
It’s a framework for APIs.
The six constraints, or rules, of RESTful
architecture are a uniform interface, client-server
architecture, stateless operations, cacheable
(or non-cacheable) functions, a layered system,
and optionally something called code-on-demand.
If you’re curious to know more details about
all of these requirements check out this link,
but now I will explain just a few of them
that I think you should know for the CCNA.
The first is client-server.
REST APIs use a client-server architecture,
like HTTP.
The client uses API calls, basically that
means HTTP requests, to access resources on
the server, such as in the example below.
The separation between the client and server
means that they can both change and evolve
independently of each other, they aren’t
dependent on one another.
And when the client application changes or
the server application changes, the interface
between them must not break, it should continue
to function.
I think you’re fairly familiar with client-server
architecture already, it’s used in various
aspects of networking.
The next characteristic I want to cover is
that REST API exchanges are stateless.
I haven’t mentioned this term yet in the
course, but it’s an important one.
Statelessness means that each API exchange
is a separate event, independent of all past
exchanges between the client and server.
So, the server does not store information
about previous requests to determine how it
should respond to new requests.
Each new request is a totally separate event.
And if authentication is required, this means
that the client has to authenticate with the
server for each request it makes.
Although I haven’t used the term stateless,
or stateful, in the course yet, I have introduced
some stateful and stateless protocols.
For example, TCP is stateful.
It establishes connections and uses sequence
and acknowledgment numbers to keep track of
the exchanges between hosts.
UDP, on the other hand, is stateless.
No connection is set up and neither host keeps
track of any sequence or acknowledgment numbers.
The data is simply sent from host A to host
B, UDP doesn’t keep track of the state of
the exchange.
Now, I want to make a clarification.
Although REST APIs use HTTP, which uses TCP
as its Layer 4 protocol, HTTP and REST APIs
themselves aren’t stateful.
Keep in mind that the functions of the layers
of the OSI model are separate.
Just because a stateful Layer 4 protocol is
used doesn’t mean that the application layer
protocol must also be stateful.
The last rule of REST APIs that I’ll mention
is the cacheable OR non-cacheable requirement.
Let me explain.
REST APIs must support caching of data, basically
that means storing data for future use.
You might have heard this term before in reference
to web browsing.
For example, your computer might cache many
elements of a web page so that it doesn’t
have to retrieve the entire page every time
you visit it.
This improves performance for the client and
reduces the load on the server.
So, caching must be supported, but that doesn’t
mean that every resource has to be cacheable.
Not all resources have to be cacheable, but
cacheable resources must be declared as cacheable
when the server sends them to the client,
so the client will cache them for future use.
As I said before, if you’re curious about
the other aspects of REST APIs you can check
this link for restfulapi.net, but those three
are the key ones you should understand for
now.
And I’m repeating myself, but let me say
this again.
For applications to communicate over a network,
networking protocols must be used to facilitate
those communications.
And for REST APIs, HTTP is the most common
choice, or more often HTTPS, its encrypted
version is used.
That’s all we’ll cover for REST.
For the CCNA, Make sure you know the CRUD
actions, HTTP client request verbs, HTTP server
response codes, and the basic characteristics
of REST APIs that we covered in this video.
Now let’s move on to try some simple REST
API calls using free resources provided by
Cisco DevNet.
So, what is Cisco DevNet?
I’ll let them describe it themselves.
Cisco DevNet is Cisco’s developer program
to help developers and IT professionals who
want to write applications and develop integrations
with Cisco products, platforms, and APIs.
There’s the magic word, API.
Basically, DevNet offers lots of free resources
such as courses, tutorials, labs, sandboxes,
documentation, etc. to learn about automation
and develop your skills.
It really is a great resource and it keeps
getting better.
Note that there is also a DevNet certification
track that you can pursue if you’re interested
in network automation.
If that’s the case for you, perhaps consider
the DevNet associate cert after you get your
CCNA.
Today we will use their Cisco DNA Center Sandbox
to send a REST API call using Postman.
DNA Center is one of Cisco’s SDN controllers,
and we’ll cover it in the next video when
we go more in depth regarding SDN.
DevNet has various always-on sandboxes, which
are devices you are free to access at any
time and look around to get familiar with
them.
In this case we’ll use their always-on DNA
Center sandbox.
And Postman, which we’ll use to send the
API calls, is a platform for building and
using APIs.
It’s also a great learning tool.
So, to start I want you to make an account
on DevNet, developer.cisco.com, and also make
an account on postman.com and download the
desktop app.
You can use it directly in your browser too,
but I like to use the desktop app.
For this demonstration we will simply follow
this short tutorial on DevNet.
Go to this link or just do a google search
for ‘devnet dna center getting started’,
it should be the top result.
Note that you don’t have to follow along,
you can just watch me do it, but I do recommend
that you try it out yourself.
But even if you’re just following what I’m
doing, make sure you read the tutorial on
DevNet too because it will explain the reason
for each of the steps.
I’ll just show you them.
So, I’ve installed the Postman desktop app
and opened it.
From the home screen, click on workspaces
and and select My Workspace.
If you don’t have a workspace you can create
one by clicking where it says ‘create workspace’.
Now I’m in my workspace.
Next you should click New here.
That will open this window, where you can
select what you want to create.
For example, you can create a new API, documentation
for an API, a mock server to test APIs, etc.
In this case, we want to create an HTTP request
which we will send to DevNet’s DNA center
server.
After clicking on HTTP request, we can now
specify what kind of HTTP request we want
to send to DNA center’s REST API.
As explained in the DevNet tutorial, first
we have to generate an authorization token
which we will use for our second HTTP request.
First, set the HTTP verb to POST, it is GET
by default.
Then we have to specify the URL.
Just a quick note, the DevNet tutorial uses
the term URL, Uniform Resource Locator, but
I used the term URI, Uniform Resource Identifier,
earlier in the video.
Basically, a URL is just a type of URI.
You can google ‘URI vs URL’ for more info.
So, if we send a POST request to this URL,
an authorization token will be generated.
However we have to specify a username and
password for that to happen.
To do that, click on authorization here, and
then select Basic Auth.
That will open this menu, where you should
enter these credentials.
Username devnetuser, password Cisco123! with
a capital C and an exclamation point at the
end.
Okay, the POST is ready so now we can click
send to send the POST request to DNA center’s
API.
If the POST is successful you will get a response
with code 200, OK.
The body of the response message will include
your authorization token in JSON key-value
format.
Make sure to copy the value of the token.
You don’t have to copy the quotation marks
around the string, just the part I’ve highlighted.
Okay, now we’re ready to send the second
API call, which will retrieve a device inventory
from the DNA center controller.
First, change the HTTP verb to GET.
We will also send this request to a different
URL, as written in the tutorial.
And the next step is to add an additional
HTTP header with our authentication token.
To do that, click on ‘headers’ here, enter
‘X-Auth-Token’ for the key, and in the
value field paste the authorization key you
got from DNA center with the previous API
call.
Okay, now we’re ready for the second API
call, click on send to send the GET request.
If the GET is successful, you will once again
get a response with a 200 OK code.
And in the body we get the requested information,
JSON-formatted data listing the inventory
of devices managed by the DNA center controller.
The output here is quite long, but let me
show output for one of the devices.
Here is that output.
You should be familiar with the format, as
I mentioned it’s JSON.
So, by looking at this output we can learn
about this device that is managed by the DNA
center controller.
For example, the device family is listed as
switches or hubs.
Since hubs aren’t really used anymore, it’s
safe to say that this is a switch.
The role is access, so it’s an access layer
switch.
The hostname is leaf1.abc.com.
Leaf1, perhaps that means this is a leaf switch
in a spine-leaf architecture.
Here’s the platform ID, C9300-24U.
This is the device model, Catalyst 9300.
Here’s a picture of a C9300, by the way.
We can also get info like the uptime, how
much time has passed since the device booted
up.
So, that was a quick look at some basic REST
API calls to Cisco DNA Center using Postman.
We retrieved data in a machine-readable format,
JSON, so we can write applications that gather
data like this, interact with it, tell DNA
center to change it, etc.
We’ve barely scratched the surface, but
I hope you’re starting to see the utility
of APIs.
Here’s what we covered in this video.
We briefly reviewed what an API is, and then
looked at CRUD operations and their equivalent
HTTP verbs.
Then we looked at the basic characteristics
of REST APIs, and finally tried a few REST
API Calls to DNA Center using a Cisco DevNet
tutorial.
As I mentioned earlier, make sure you know
the CRUD actions, HTTP client request verbs,
HTTP server response codes, and the basic
characteristics of REST APIs that I covered
in this video.
I also gave various links to different resources
throughout the video that I recommend reading,
although they will go in much more depth than
is required.
But check them out if you want a greater understanding.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
quiz for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim, the best practice exams
for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
What HTTP response code would you expect to
receive if you tried to GET a resource that
doesn’t exist on the server?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, 404.
This code means Not Found.
If the requested resource does not exist on
the server, you can expect this response code.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following is NOT a constraint
of RESTful architecture?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, stateful.
REST APIs are stateless, meaning that each
individual client request is a unique event,
not dependent on any previous requests.
In addition to these five constraints, there
is an optional one called ‘code on demand’,
which basically extends client functionality
by allowing them to download and execute code
from servers.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which category of HTTP response would you
expect in response to a successful request?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, you should expect a
response code beginning with 2.
This indicates a successful request, for example
with the 200 OK response code or the 201 Created
response code.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
HTTP verbs PUT and PATCH are equivalent to
what CRUD operation?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, U, which stands for
update.
Note that you might also see PUT categorized
as a Create action, because it can be used
to create new variables, but usually it’s
used as an Update function.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following would you expect to
find as the scheme of a URI?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, HTTPS.
The scheme of a URI identifies the protocol
you are using, typically HTTP or HTTPS for
web services and REST APIs.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.