Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will look at software-defined
networking.
In the first video of this network automation
series we already covered the fundamentals
such as centralizing the control plane in
an SDN controller, northbound and southbound
APIs, etc.
So, in this video we’ll take a more in-depth
look at one of Cisco’s SDN offerings, SD-Access,
Software-Defined Access.
We’ll cover exam topics 6.3 and 6.4.
You’ll learn new terms like overlay, underlay,
and fabric which are essential concepts in
SDN that we haven’t covered yet.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll briefly review the points about
SDN that you’ll need to remember for this
video.
Then I’ll introduce Cisco’s SD-Access,
including important concepts like underlay,
overlay, and fabric.
I’ll also introduce Cisco’s DNA Center
management platform, which is an essential
part of SD-Access, and compare it to traditional
network management.
Make sure to watch until the end of the video
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
Let’s reviews some points about SDN.
SDN is an approach to networking that centralizes
the control plane into an application called
a controller.
Traditional control planes use a distributed
architecture, which means that every network
device has its own control plane.
The control planes of each network device
use protocols like OSPF to communicate with
each other and share routing information,
each device has its own ACLs and security
rules, etc.
That’s a distributed control plane.
An SDN controller centralizes control plane
functions like calculating routes.
Network devices no longer use OSPF to share
information with each other, instead they
share information with the controller, which
takes that information and calculates routes
for the entire network.
Now, depending on the SDN solution the entire
control plane might be centralized in the
SDN controller, or perhaps only part of the
control plane is centralized, leaving some
functions on the individual network devices.
The controller can interact programmatically
with the network devices using APIs.
Specifically it uses what we call the southbound
interface to do that.
Then there is also the northbound interface,
which is what allows us to interact with the
controller using our scripts and applications.
Okay, those are the fundamental points of
SDN that I wanted to review.
And here’s one more look at the SDN architecture
we covered in the first video of this automation
section.
The applications are on top, the controller
in the middle, and the network devices on
the bottom.
Actually, these three ‘layers’ of the
architecture have names.
On top there is the application layer.
This layer contains scripts and applications
that tell the SDN controller what network
behaviors are desired.
Note that this isn’t the application layer
of the OSI model, this is a totally different
concept.
We’re not talking about the OSI model here.
Anyway, next is the control layer.
This contains the SDN controller that receives
and processes instructions from the application
layer.
Although this is a separate concept from the
‘control plane’, this layer is also what
contains the centralized control plane of
the network.
And finally there is the infrastructure layer,
which contains the actual devices that are
responsible for forwarding messages across
the network.
I didn’t mention these layers in earlier
videos, so take the time to learn them now.
The application layer contains apps and scripts
for instructing the SDN controller, the control
layer contains the SDN controller, and the
infrastructure layer contains the network
devices.
Okay, so I’ve told you the basics of what
SDN is and its purpose, but we still haven’t
looked at a specific example of SDN.
So, let’s take a look at one, Cisco Software-Defined
Access.
Cisco SD-Access is Cisco’s SDN solution
for automating campus LANs.
So, office wired and wireless LANs, for example.
Cisco has other SDN solutions, for example
ACI, Application Centric Infrastructure, is
their SDN solution for automating data center
networks.
Remember when I explained spine-leaf architecture
earlier in the course?
That is used extensively in ACI data center
networks.
Cisco also has SD-WAN, their SDN solution
for automating WANs.
But for now let’s look at SD-Access.
Cisco DNA, Digital Network Architecture, Center
is the controller at the center of SD-Access.
In the previous video about REST APIs we sent
a REST API call to DNA Center, so perhaps
you remember that name.
Okay, let’s look at the basic SD-Access
architecture.
At the center, in the control layer, we have
DNA Center.
And then under it we have the network devices
in our campus LAN in the infrastructure layer.
These devices form the fabric of SD-Access,
and I’ll explain that term in the next slide.
In the application layer we have our scripts
and apps that interact with DNA center.
These could be tools we develop, third-party
tools, or tools directly from Cisco.
DNA Center itself also has a GUI that we can
use to control it.
Okay, so that’s the basic architecture of
Cisco’s SD Access.
Notice how it fits perfectly into the SDN
Application layer, Control layer, Infrastructure
layer model.
Next let’s look at that term ‘fabric’.
To understand the fabric, you need to understand
two other terms.
First, the underlay is the underlying physical
network of devices and connections, wired
and wireless, which provide IP connectivity,
for example with a routing protocol like IS-IS.
Usually I’d use OSPF as an example, since
it’s the most common interior gateway routing
protocol, but soon you’ll see why I chose
IS-IS for this example.
Basically the underlay is a bunch of multilayer
switches and their connections.
Then the overlay is the virtual network built
on top of the physical underlay network.
For example, SD-Access uses a protocol called
VXLAN, virtual extensible LAN, to build tunnels.
And fabric is the term we use to refer to
the combination of the overlay and underlay,
the physical and virtual network as a whole.
For example, this is the underlay network.
The physical multilayer switches and their
connections form the underlay, and they are
perhaps running IS-IS to share routing information
and provide connectivity throughout the network.
Then the overlay network consists of VXLAN
tunnels, for example between these two switches.
When hosts in the LAN communicate with each
other, their traffic is sent over the VXLAN
tunnels.
That’s the overlay network.
And the fabric refers to the physical and
virtual network as a whole, overlay plus underlay.
Both are necessary to make SD-Access work.
Okay, now let me give a little more detail
about both the underlay and overlay.
So, let’s talk about the underlay.
The underlay’s purpose is to support the
VXLAN tunnels of the overlay.
To make a virtual network of tunnels, the
devices first need to be connected and able
to reach other of course, so the underlay
is very important.
There are three different roles for switches
in SD-Access.
Those are edge node, these are switches that
connect to end hosts, like a traditional access
layer switch.
Then there are border nodes, which connect
to devices outside of the SD-Access domain,
for example connecting to a WAN router.
And finally there are control nodes, which
use a protocol called LISP, Locator ID Separation
Protocol, to perform various control plane
functions.
I think LISP is far beyond what you need to
know for the CCNA, so just know that it is
used for the control plane of SD-Access.
Note that you can add SD-Access on top of
an existing network if your network hardware
and software supports it.
This is called a brownfield deployment, when
you add it on to an already existing network.
If you’re curious which hardware supports
it, you can google ‘Cisco SD-Access compatibility
matrix’, but you don’t have to know the
specific devices for the CCNA.
And also note that in this case DNA center
won’t configure the underlay, because this
could be a major risk to the current working
production network.
Ideally you will be using a greenfield deployment,
which is a totally new network built for the
purpose of SD-Access.
In this case DNA center will configure the
devices for the optimal SD-access underlay.
For example, all switches are layer 3 and
use IS-IS as their routing protocol.
That’s why I mentioned IS-IS in the example
earlier.
Additionally all links between switches are
routed ports, so STP is not needed to avoid
Layer 2 loops.
And edge nodes, so access switches, act as
the default gateway of end hosts.
This is known as a routed access layer, we’ve
brought layer 3 all the way down to the access
switches that end hosts connect to.
Let me demonstrate with a diagram.
Here’s a traditional LAN.
Notice that STP is used to avoid layer 2 loops,
and an FHRP, for example HSRP, is used by
the distribution layer switches to provide
a redundant default gateway for the end hosts.
So, to send traffic out of their local network,
they will send it to the virtual IP provided
by the FHRP, 192.168.1.1.
In an SD-access underlay, however, all connections
between switches are Layer 3 and IS-IS is
used to exchange routing information.
Note that STP is no longer needed, and an
FHRP isn’t needed either.
Instead, the access layer switches are the
default gateways of the end hosts.
Now we have a routed access layer.
Now let me briefly introduce a few aspects
of the SD-Access overlay.
First, LISP provides the control plane of
SD-Access.
A list of mappings of EIDs to RLOCs is kept.
Let me explain those terms.
EIDs, endpoint identifiers, identify end hosts
connected to edge switches, and RLOCs, routing
locators, identify the edge switch which can
be used to reach the end host.
Of course, there is a lot more detail to cover
about LISP, but I think with just that you
can see how it differs from the traditional
control plane.
Instead of a traditional routing table to
locate destination hosts, a DNS-like system
of mappings is used.
Cisco TrustSec, CTS, provides policy control
such as QoS and security policy.
Just remember that name, Cisco TrustSec, you
don’t have to know about its functionality.
And finally VXLAN provides the data plane
of SD-Access, the tunnels that are used to
actually forward traffic in the data plane.
Let’s look at how VXLAN tunnels work with
LISP.
Notice that SW3 is a control node, so it is
important for the function of LISP.
PC2 is connected to SW2, and it tells the
control node that PC2 is reachable via SW2.
So, SW3 creates that mapping.
Now PC1 wants to send traffic to PC2, so it
sends it to the default gateway, SW1.
SW1 asks SW3, how can I reach PC2?
And SW3 informs it that PC2 is reachable via
SW2.
So, the message from PC1 is forwarded over
a VXLAN tunnel between SW1 and SW2.
Okay, that’s all I’ll say about the overlay
for now.
VXLAN does more than just create tunnels,
it provides a lot of features to SD-Access
which I won’t get into in this video.
Just know the difference between fabric, overlay,
and underlay, and know some basics of SD-Access
like edge node, border node, and control node,
LISP, VXLAN, and Cisco TrustSec.
Now let’s look a bit more at DNA Center.
DNA Center itself has two main roles.
First, it is the SDN controller used in SD-Access,
as I mentioned earlier.
Additionally it can be a network manager in
a traditional network that isn’t using SD-Access.
In that case, although it doesn’t provide
SD-Access functions, it still acts as a central
point to monitor, analyze, and configure the
network.
Although I will mention both purposes, for
this lecture we’re focusing on the SD-Access
application.
Note that DNA Center is a software application
installed on Cisco UCS server hardware.
I mentioned Cisco UCS in the virtualization
lecture of this course.
DNA Center has a REST API, as you already
know, which can be used to interact with it.
And its southbound interface supports protocols
such as NETCONF and RESTCONF, as well as traditional
protocols Telnet, SSH, and SNMP to control
and monitor devices.
DNA Center enables something called intent-based
networking, IBN, yet another buzzword.
Basically, the goal is to allow the engineer
to communicate their intent for network behavior
to DNA Center, and then DNA Center will take
care of the details of the actual configurations
and policies on the devices.
It simplifies the process, and allows engineers
to spend time on more important things than
analyzing and configuring policies on devices
one at a time.
Here’s one example.
Traditional security policies using ACLs can
become very cumbersome.
For example, ACLs can have thousands of entries,
and the intent of entries is easily forgotten
with time and as engineers leave and new engineers
take over.
Looking at another engineer’s configurations
and trying to figure out the intent is often
not an easy task.
And configuring and applying ACLs correctly
across a network is cumbersome and leaves
room for error.
DNA Center, on the other hand, allows the
engineer to specify the intent of the policy,
for example this group of users can’t communicate
with this group, or this group can access
this server but not that server, etc, and
DNA Center will take care of the exact details
of implementing the policy.
This is what configuring policies on DNA Center
looks like.
Notice on the left here we have source groups.
Of course, you’d have to define the groups
first, which users belong in which groups.
And here we have those same groups as destination.
Up here we have the legend for the colors
in the policy grid.
Note that the entire grid is white now, so
default.
However, let’s say any traffic sourced from
users in the developers group and destined
for the Test_Servers group should be permitted.
Now, what about traffic sourced from the guest
group?
They shouldn’t be able to access our servers,
so we’ll make that red.
How about users in the employees group?
Maybe that depends on various factors, we
can’t just permit or deny all traffic, so
we would want to make a custom policy for
that.
We can go ahead and define policies like this,
it’s a very simple and straightforward way
of creating and applying policies across the
entire SD-Access fabric.
No need to configure policies on devices one
at a time.
I’m not showing the whole process here of
course, but one thing to note is that the
engineer can write an explanation for each
policy made, making it much easier to understand
the purpose of policies later.
Okay, now let’s take a look at some of the
other features of DNA Center.
In the menu on the left side you can see there
are various sections, and I’ve opened the
design section.
Here we can build the network hierarchy, manage
IP addresses and subnets, configure DHCP servers,
DNS servers, etc, among other things.
Here, for example, I’m looking at one site,
SJC-20, on a map.
You can map your enterprise’s sites all
over the world and create hierarchies based
on country, etc.
In the policy menu you can configure policies
like the example I showed you earlier.
You tell DNA Center how the network devices
should behave, and DNA Center will change
that into configurations on the devices in
the network.
For example, here’s that group-based access
control page again.
A simple and logical way to configure network
policies.
In the provision menu we can manage our device
inventory and add new devices.
Other services are available as well, as you
can see in the menu.
Here’s the inventory page.
In the side bar you can see that there are
3 unassigned devices under global.
By default, when you add devices to DNA Center
they will be under the global site, until
you assign them to a specific site.
You can see their status of ‘managed’
here, this means they are under control of
DNA Center, they are not independent devices.
This is also the default setting when you
register a device in DNA Center.
Here you can see the compliance status of
the devices.
The top device is compliant with our policies,
but the bottom two aren’t.
I clicked on one of the non-compliant devices,
and you can see why it is labeled as non-compliant.
The software image, the version of IOS, is
not up to date.
The version should be 17.03.03, but currently
it is 16.11.1c.
We can use DNA Center to update that later
if we want.
And here you can see that it is also non-compliant
with some security advisories.
Anyway moving on, in the assurance section
of the menu you can monitor the status of
the network.
You can make sure the devices are all up and
running without issues.
For example, here I can see which devices
in the network are considered ‘healthy’
by DNA Center.
3 of 4 devices are in good health, and 1 of
them simply has no health data.
Okay, that’s all we’ll look at for now,
but if you want to look around DNA Center
yourself you can check out the DevNet sandbox
at sandboxdnac.cisco.com, and you can see
the username and password here.
I highly recommend checking it out and looking
around at what DNA Center has to offer.
Okay, that was a quick look at DNA Center,
but to be honest you don’t have to be familiar
with all of the functions of DNA Center for
the CCNA.
Basically, just understand its role as a network
controller in SD-Access architecture, and
also understand that it can be a network management
platform in a traditional network.
However, the exam topics do state that you
should be able to compare DNA Center-enabled
device management with traditional device
management.
Actually, I’ve covered most of these points
already when I first introduced network automation,
but let’s review to make sure.
First, let’s review some characteristics
of traditional network management.
Devices are configured one-by-one via SSH
or console connection.
This is what we’ve been doing throughout
the labs in this course.
Devices are manually configured via console
connection before being deployed.
This means when deploying a new device to
a network.
You first have to manually set it up before
connecting it to the network.
Configurations and policies are managed per-device,
in a distributed manner.
There is no central management.
New network deployments take a long time due
to the manual labor required.
Setting up dozens of new devices manually
takes a lot of time, and also errors and failures
are more likely due to increased manual effort.
Now, I don’t want to make it seem like traditional
network management is bad, but you should
be aware of these potential downsides.
Now some characteristics of DNA Center-based
network management.
Devices are centrally managed and monitored
from the DNA Center GUI or other applications
using its REST API.
In this video I showed you the DNA Center
GUI, but using the REST API other applications
can be used to interact with DNA Center too.
With DNA Center, the administrator communicates
their intended network behavior to DNA Center,
which changes those intentions into configurations
on the managed network devices.
Configurations and policies are centrally
managed, they’re all stored and managed
on DNA Center.
Software versions are also centrally managed.
DNA Center can monitor cloud servers for new
versions and then update the managed devices
when needed.
In this video you saw an example of DNA Center
showing us an alert for a device with an old
software version.
Finally, with DNA Center new network deployments
are much quicker.
New devices can automatically receive their
configurations from DNA Center without manual
configuration.
Not only is this faster, human error is reduced
too, which is a huge bonus.
Okay, that’s all I’ll say about this.
Most of these points we have already covered,
but make sure you’re aware of them because
it is mentioned on the exam topics.
Okay, let’s review what we covered.
We first reviewed SDN, and I newly introduced
the terms application layer, control layer,
and infrastructure layer.
Then, as an example of SDN, I introduced some
concepts of Cisco SD-Access.
The main takeaways from this section are the
concepts of underlay, overlay, and fabric.
Make sure you understand those concepts.
Then I showed you some functions of Cisco
DNA Center, and compared network management
with DNA Center to traditional network management.
Remember, DNA Center is an SDN controller
in SD-Access architecture, but it can also
be used as a general network management tool
even in networks that don’t use SD-Access.
Make sure to watch until the end of the quiz
for a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which of the following terms describes the
network of devices and physical connections?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, underlay.
The underlay refers to the underlying physical
network, and then the virtual overlay network
is built on top of it.
The combination of underlay and overlay is
called the fabric.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
In which of the following layers would you
expect to find scripts that interact with
the controller?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, application.
In SDN architecture, the application layer
includes apps and scripts that can be used
to interact with the controller, which is
in the control layer.
Finally the bottom layer is the infrastructure
layer, which includes the network devices.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following is a characteristic
of an optimal SD-Access underlay network as
configured by DNA-Center?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, all links between switches
are layer 3.
This means that spanning tree is not needed,
and no links will have to be disabled because
there is no risk of layer 2 loops.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which protocol is used to create virtual tunnels
in the SD-Access overlay?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, VXLAN.
It is used to create virtual tunnels in the
overlay network.
And although we didn’t cover any details
at all, the ‘extensible’ in the name ‘virtual
extensible LAN’ is very important.
It means that VXLAN supports many different
features which are used by SD-Access.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following are valid switch roles
in Cisco SD-Access?
(select three) Pause the video now to select
the best answers.
Okay, the answers areA, C, and D. Control,
border, and edge nodes.
These are the three different switch roles
in Cisco SD-Access, and there is no such thing
as a management node.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus question
in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.