Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover configuration
management tools Ansible, Puppet, and Chef.
They are exam topic 6.6, which says you must
be able to recognize the capabilities of configuration
management mechanisms.
So, just like with the other automation topics
on the CCNA, you don’t have to actually
be able to use these tools yet, but Cisco
expects you to have a basic understanding
of their purpose and capabilities.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll introduce configuration management
tools, what they are and why we use them.
Then I’ll introduce some of the characteristics
of the configuration management tools Ansible,
Puppet, and Chef.
So far I’ve introduced various automation
tools, and I just want to say that these are
just tools.
They are suitable for some jobs, and not suitable
for others.
Depending on the company you work for and
its size, they might use a lot of different
automation tools, or just a few of them, or
none at all.
Configuration management tools like these
three can be useful in any network, but especially
in medium to large networks with hundreds
or even thousands of devices.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
video for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim, the best practice exams
for the CCNA.
To understand one reason why configuration
management tools are useful, let me explain
the concept of configuration drift.
Configuration drift is when individual changes
made over time cause a device’s configuration
to deviate from the standard and correct configurations
as defined by the company.
This is not a good thing, and should be avoided
wherever possible.
I mentioned this earlier in the course, but
each device in a network typically doesn’t
have a totally unique configuration.
Although each device will have unique parts
of its configuration, for example IP addresses
and its host name, most of a device’s configuration
is usually defined in standard templates designed
by the network architects or engineers of
the company.
For example, you can expect all of your routers
to have the same SNMP configurations, the
same Syslog configurations, the same AAA configurations
for logging in, one or two WAN interfaces,
one or two LAN interfaces, etc.
Those all follow standard templates, with
just a few unique configurations for each
device.
But, as individual engineers make changes
to devices, for example to troubleshoot and
fix network issues, test configurations, etc,
the configuration of a device can drift away
from the standard.
Often records of these individual changes
and their reasons aren’t kept, and this
can lead to issues in the future.
For example, it might be hard to tell if a
certain configuration is necessary when looking
at it a few years later.
The configuration management tools we’ll
look at today can help with this, but even
without automation tools like Ansible, it
is best to have standard configuration management
practices.
For example, something I did in the past was
when a change is made, save the config as
a text file and place it in a shared folder.
In my case, a standard file naming system
hostname_year month day was used.
Notice in the screenshot here we have three
different versions of R1’s config from three
different dates, and three versions of R2’s
config as well.
This helps keep track of previous versions
of the config and see when changes were made.
However there are flaws to this system, as
an engineer might simply forget to place the
new config in the folder after making changes.
In that case, which one should be considered
the correct config?
And even if the configurations are properly
saved in a folder like this, it doesn’t
guarantee that the configurations actually
match the standard.
It just helps us keep track of different versions
of the config.
Plus, a manual approach is not very scalable
in networks with hundreds of devices.
So, configuration management tools can of
course help us with the issues I just mentioned
like preventing configuration drift, but they
can also assist us in configuration provisioning.
Configuration provisioning refers to how configuration
changes are applied to devices.
This includes configuring new devices too,
so not just making changes to current devices.
As you know, traditionally configuration provisioning
is done by connecting to devices one-by-one
via SSH, or console as well of course.
But this is not practical in large networks.
It simply doesn’t scale well in networks
with hundreds or thousands of devices.
Configuration management tools like Ansible,
Puppet, and Chef allow us to make changes
to devices on a mass scale with a fraction
of the time and effort.
Two essential components that you’ll find
in all of these tools are templates and variables.
Here’s an example of a template, where values
aren’t given for things like the hostname,
IP address, mask, OSPF process ID, and area.
Instead, we use a separate file specifying
the variables for a specific device, R1 in
this case.
Given a template and the appropriate variables,
a config is generated and sent to the device.
Of course, this is just a small snippet of
a configuration, but I think you can see how
easy it would be to generate the configuration
of many devices at once.
All devices can share the template, and we
just need to specify some variables like hostnames,
IP addresses, etc.
Exactly how these templates and variables
are managed is different depending on the
tool, but they all use a system like this.
Okay now let me introduce configuration management
tools.
These are network automation tools that facilitate
the centralized control of large numbers of
network devices.
They can be useful in networks of any size,
but typically they’re used in larger networks.
The options you need to be aware of for the
CCNA are Ansible, Puppet, and Chef.
When it comes to managing network devices,
that’s also the order of their popularity.
Ansible first, Puppet second, and Chef third.
However, these tools weren’t originally
developed for the management of network devices.
They were originally developed after the rise
of VMs, to enable server system admins to
automate the process of creating, configuring,
and removing VMs.
But these days they are also widely used to
manage network devices, especially Ansible.
They can be used to perform tasks such as
generate configurations for new devices on
a large scale.
Using templates it’s very simple to generate
a new configuration for a new device, it’s
just a bit of copy and paste.
They can be used to perform configuration
changes on devices.
It can be all devices in your network, or
a certain subset of devices, or just one device.
You tell Ansible or Puppet or Chef which changes
you want to make on which devices, and it
does the rest of the work for you.
These tools can also be used to check device
configurations for compliance with defined
standards.
If a device’s configuration doesn’t match
the standard, an alert could be sent out,
for example.
Then you can investigate that issue and fix
it, to make the configuration comply with
the standard again.
Or you can automate the change.
You can also compare configurations between
devices, and between different versions of
configurations on the same device.
These are just some examples of what you can
do with these tools.
Basically, they solve the problem of managing
the configurations of devices in networks
with hundreds or thousands of different devices.
Now let’s take a look at the basic characteristics
of each of these three tools.
First up, Ansible.
Ansible is a configuration management tool
owned by Red Hat, famous for Red Hat Linux.
Ansible itself is written in Python.
The other two I’ll introduce, Puppet and
Chef, are written in a different language,
Ruby.
Ansible is agentless.
So, what does that mean?
It means that it doesn’t require any special
software to run on the managed devices.
Instead, Ansible simply uses SSH to connect
to devices, make configuration changes, extract
information, etc.
This is a big advantage of Ansible which makes
it very versatile, and it’s probably the
reason that it is the most popular choice
for network device configuration management.
Ansible also uses what’s called a push model.
The Ansible server, also called the control
node, uses SSH to connect to managed devices
and push configuration changes to them.
This is different than Puppet and Chef which
use a pull model, in which the managed devices
connect to the server to receive their configurations.
After installing Ansible, you must create
several text files that it can use.
Playbooks are the ‘blueprint’ of automation
tasks.
They outline the logic and actions of the
tasks that Ansible should do, and these playbooks
are written in YAML.
Then you’ll also need inventory files which
list the devices that will be managed by Ansible,
as well as their characteristics.
For example, their device role such as access
switch, core switch, WAN router, firewall
etc can be listed as a characteristic.
These inventory files can be written in multiple
formats, such as INI or YAML.
You also need templates, which as you saw
earlier represent a device configuration file,
but specific values for variables are not
provided, for example the host name and IP
addresses.
These templates are written in a format called
Jinja2.
And finally you’ll need variable files.
They list variables and their values, as you
also saw earlier.
These values are substituted into the templates
to create complete configuration files, and
these files are written in YAML.
Let’s look at a diagram to visualize how
this works.
So, here we have our inventory, templates,
variables, and playbook.
The inventory provides a list of devices,
the template files provide configuration templates
for the devices, and the variables provide
specific variables and their values.
These inputs are given to the playbook which
takes the necessary actions to push the config
to the managed devices.
Okay, that’s all for Ansible.
You should know that it is agentless, written
in Python, uses a push model, uses SSH to
connect to devices, and uses YAML for its
necessary files.
Next up, Puppet.
Puppet is a configuration management tool
written in the programming language Ruby.
It is typically agent-based, which means that
specific software, a Puppet agent, must be
installed on the managed devices.
And not all Cisco devices support a Puppet
agent, which is a major reason that Ansible
is more popular for network device management.
However it can be run agentless, in which
a proxy agent runs on an external host and
the proxy agent uses SSH to connect to the
managed devices and communicate with them.
Note that in Puppet the server is called the
Puppet master.
And Puppet uses a pull model, so clients pull
configurations from the Puppet master instead
of the Puppet master pushing configurations
to them.
And note that clients use TCP 8140 to communicate
with the Puppet master.
You probably should remember that port number.
And instead of YAML, it uses a proprietary
language for its files.
Like Ansible it requires some different text
files on the Puppet master, for example a
Manifest file defines the desired configuration
state of a network device.
The Puppet master then uses this Manifest
to generate specific configurations for the
managed devices.
And just like Ansible, templates are used
too, in this case to help generate Manifests
for the devices.
Here’s a very simplified look at that.
Note that some of the devices have a Puppet
agent installed which provides a REST API
to communicate with the device, but one doesn’t.
Instead it will communicate via the external
agent.
In both cases, the network devices are able
to pull configurations from the Puppet master.
Okay, that’s Puppet.
Remember that it’s written in Ruby, is typically
agent-based, the server is called the Puppet
master, it uses a pull model, clients use
TCP 8140 to communicate with the Puppet master,
it uses a proprietary language for its files
instead of YAML, and uses Manifests to define
the desired configuration state of devices.
Those are the main points you should know
about Puppet.
Finally let’s look at Chef.
Like Puppet, it is a configuration management
tool written in Ruby.
It is agent-based, so specific software, a
Chef agent, must be installed on the managed
devices.
And not all Cisco devices support a Chef agent,
in fact most don’t.
So, this is the least popular of the three
choices.
Like Puppet, Chef also uses a Pull model.
And the Chef server uses TCP port 10002 to
send configurations to clients.
It uses various other ports, too, but you
should remember 10002.
And Chef’s files use a DSL, Domain-Specific
Language, which is based on Ruby.
So, what are some of those files used by Chef.
We have resources, which are like the ingredients
in a recipe.
They define configuration objects managed
by Chef.
A configuration object could be, for example,
a set of configuration commands.
Then there are recipes, like the recipes in
a cookbook.
They outline the logic and actions of the
tasks performed on the resources.
And of course there are cookbooks too, sets
of related recipes grouped together.
And finally run-lists, which are an ordered
list of recipes that are run to bring a device
to the desired configuration state.
And here’s a diagram from the Chef website
demonstrating the architecture.
Admins will do their work on a Chef workstation,
a computer they use to prepare cookbooks,
recipes, etc.
Required information is stored on a Chef server,
and the managed devices, the Chef clients,
communicate with the Chef server.
Notice that possible clients include servers,
storage devices, virtual platforms, public
clouds, and of course network devices.
As mentioned earlier, these tools weren’t
designed specifically for network devices,
and they can be used for various purposes.
So, that’s Chef.
Remember that it is written in Ruby, is agent-based,
uses a pull model, uses TCP 10002 to send
configurations, and its files such as cookbooks
use a language based on Ruby.
And finally, here’s a chart comparing the
three.
Something I didn’t mention clearly is that
Puppet and Chef both communicate using HTTP,
via their REST APIs.
I recommend memorizing these basic characteristics
as shown in the chart, you may be tested on
them.
Okay, here’s what we covered in this video.
I introduced configuration management tools
and what we use them for.
And then I introduced three that you should
know for the CCNA: Ansible, Puppet, and Chef.
We only covered some very basic characteristics
of each of them, but that’s all you need
to know for the CCNA.
As you continue your studies you’ll probably
get some hands on experience with these tools,
especially Ansible, but for now you just need
to know the basics.
And make sure to watch until the end of the
quiz for a bonus practice question from Boson
Software’s ExSim, the best practice exams
for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which of the following configuration management
tools connects to devices using SSH?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, Ansible.
Ansible is agentless, so the control node
simply connects to managed devices using SSH.
Now, a Puppet external agent also connects
to devices using SSH, but standard Puppet
architecture does not, so Ansible is definitely
the better answer here.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following configuration management
tools use a pull model?
Select all that apply.
Pause the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are A, Chef and C, Puppet.
They both use a pull model, whereas Ansible
uses a push model.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following configuration management
tools use a client-server model?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, all of the above.
Now, in this video I didn’t explicitly state
that Ansible, Puppet, or Chef use a client-server
model, but in describing their operations
I mentioned servers and clients.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following configuration management
tools are written in Ruby?
Select all that apply.
Pause the video now to select the best answers.
Okay, the answers are A, Chef and C, Puppet.
Both of these tools are written in Ruby, whereas
Ansible is written in Python.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following configuration management
tools uses playbooks?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay the answer is B, Ansible.
Ansible playbooks are the blueprints of automation
tasks.
They outline the logic and actions of the
tasks that Ansible should perform.
Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s try a bonus question from Boson
Software’s ExSim for CCNA.